---
title: 'Systemic sustainability, by Clara de Souza Bartholomeu  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
navigation:
  title: 'Gratitudes'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/9786599492931/style-bege.css">

I dedicate this work to the forest, urban trees, and non-human beings who will never read this but are the raison d'être of this work. And to you, who are reading, for your interest in dedicating time and energy to the themes here presented. Thank you.

In memory of my beloved grandfather,
Adonias Fernandes de Souza.
Você viverá para sempre nos nossos corações.
(29.04.1934 – 20.08.2020)

## Gratitudes

Firstly I wish to thank all the authors and references that supported this work. Designers, researchers from various fields of knowledge, activists, artists, curators, craftsmen and women. I hope to have done justice to your work.

I would especially like to thank professors Maria Cecilia Loschiavo dos Santos and Stefano Maffei who have guided my master thesis, which became this book. I am forever grateful for being able to exchange knowledge, laughter and visions for design with you.

I would like to thank specifically professors Cyntia Santos Malaguti de Souza, Rosana Aparecida Vasques, and my fellow researcher Bruna Montuori who commented on my Master’s thesis defense at University of São Paulo, offering important insights to perfect this work. I admire you all greatly and I am honored to have received your comments.

I thank Arianna Papadia for reminding me every day of the power of love and care (and of good pasta!); my dear friend Mateus Dal Vesco who believes in me more than I ever do; my therapist Maddalena Fontanella for keeping me sane and healthy; and all my colleagues from FAU and Polictecnico di Milano, who inspired me to write this work.

I also thank my two guardians on Earth, my mother and father, who introduced and nurtured my passion for Nature, reading and writing. I love you and feel so grateful for being your daughter.

Finally, I would like to thank all the team from Editora Sabiá, for the kindness and patience on the development of this publication. May you fly high, Sabiá!
