---
title: 'Systemic sustainability, by Clara de Souza Bartholomeu  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
navigation:
  title: 'Preface'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492931/css/style-green.css">

### Preface <br>1st book edition

What does the spider, the weaver and the researcher have in common? Well, obviously everything.

One of the greatest joys in life, at least for me, is making connections. Finding that transparent thread that links one thing to another, learning how this association works and then, eventually, making the knots yourself. This work is a woven piece, the result of theoretical explorations connecting the concepts of design and Nature through the realm of the political, using multiple threads (references) and a tridimensional loom (structure). 

When the text that follows was crafted, there was no intention or expectation of it ever becoming a published book. It was, in fact, my master thesis, an exercise to prove that I had actually learnt something in 7 years of University. As such, its objective was to map and connect relevant concepts for themes that I considered of utmost relevance, personally and for the fellow beings who share the Earth with me. 

And through the layers, intertwined, I have embedded ideas that represent this time,  our now, even if looping past and future thinking with my words. This now is both personal and collective, metamorphic, subjective. Nevertheless, a contribution, hopefully. 
