---
title: 'Systemic sustainability, by Clara de Souza Bartholomeu  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
navigation:
  title: 'Introduction'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492931/css/style-green.css">

## Introduction<br> The why

> _“Education for designers (like nearly all education), is based on the learning of skill and the acquisition of a philosophy”_ (Papanek, 1970, p. 275).

On January 21st 2019, in a dark auditorium I watched Paola Antonelli present the [22nd Triennale di Milano]{.footnote .footnote1}  and say: “_When the world goes in such weird directions as it is going right now, there are two ways that we see to react: one is the way of entrenchment, separating oneself from the rest of the world . . ., and the other way to go is empathy, it’s the opposite, it's trying to connect and trying to help each other in any way possible._”. She meant each other as a community of Earth inhabitants. Not only humans but also animals, plants, and mountains, all the other objects that populate the planet. Something moved inside of me. 

::ImageRegular
---
src: /9786599492931/images/img1.jpg
subtitle: Image 1. The Nation of Plants, installation by Stefano Mancuso at the Broken Nature Triennale. The concept for the exhibition is that in order to avoid a catastrophic future for humanity we should take a radically new approach to plants, using them not just for what they have to offer us, but also for what they can teach us. Retrieved from https://triennale.org/en/events/the-nation-of-plants-is-a-non-technical-scientific.
---
::

The soul of this thesis stemmed from this event, the Triennale Broken Nature of 2019, curated by Antonelli and her team, who offer critique and inspiration for a design that should be centered not only on humans, but on the future of the whole biosphere as well. The aim of the exhibition was to showcase projects that evidenced the decay of natural systems and suggested alternatives for “_a graceful end_” of humanity through [restaurative]{.highlight} product-systems or critical pieces. The contributions ranged from the fields of architecture, engineering, social sciences, and of course, design, especially exploring how the latter can engage with the many spheres of society on the pressing issues that are climate change, domination and extinction. Antonelli (2019) writes:

> If in the past the imitation of nature was mostly centered on its forms, more recently designers have tried to apprehend its processes and long-term wisdom, its capacity for elegance under pressure. Truly restorative design is about acknowledging the Anthropocene’s aberrations. It is about interspecies collaboration, joint ventures and co-creation, entanglement and circularity. It is about empathy, and about the realization that we are part of nature, not nature’s masters. (p. 28)

Through its multimedia provocations, the Broken Nature was designed to be a call to action to creativity [professionals]{.footnote .footnote2} (and as we see, _the very existence of this book is proof that it worked!_) and all the rest of society that _we must engage in real change now_. 

Equally moving was the work by the Colombian anthropologist Arturo Escobar and his book _Designs for the Pluriverse_ (2019). The word pluriverse, coming from the Mexican Zapatista movement, is a vision of _a world in which many worlds fit_, meaning a society in which the profound respect for others and their ways of existing is primordial. This vision harmonizes with what Antonelli calls _empathy_ (in her case, for humans and non-humans), but is highly contrasting with the hegemonic (and now globalized) culture of separation, domination, and individualism that has been established in contemporary human society. 

::ImageRegular
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme1.svg
imageStyle: "max-width: 750px;"
subtitle: Scheme 1. This scheme represents the first main inspirations for this project. By the author
---
::

In fact, Escobar advocates for a design that [is autonomous]{.highlight .footnote .footnote3}  and that is [_ontological_]{.highlight .footnote .footnote4} , meaning that it should be an active ally to the movements trying to subvert these ruling modalities into which we have been engaged By applying these concepts to design (autonomy and ontology), the author transcends the usual conception of _what design can do_ to a deeper understanding of the consequences of material culture. Thus, seeing that “all design-led objects, tools, and even services bring about particular ways of being, knowing, and doing” (Escobar, 2019) is a starting point, especially for the notion of _sustainable design_, as it entails so much more than circular materials and dematerialization of objects to start any kind of regeneration. In harmony with the critical vision presented by Broken Nature, Escobar helped me understand that if one wants to work with _sustainability_, she/he/they must understand how it is connected with the establishment of economy and politics. 

This knowledge was not acquired throughout the six years during which I attended university. Therefore, I thought that this was the perfect theme to explore in my master thesis - that culminated in this book.

### Personal _path_

Since I was a child, I wanted to “do for a living” something I couldn't even define as “sustainability”. In my childish definition, I wanted to live in harmony with trees and animals, be a witch: plant whispering, with my own rhythms connected to the Moon, befriending all tiny creatures which shared the house with me (including spiders and ants), asking deep questions to wise mountains and mingling with my fellow human and non-human companions. Although I believe that this is all still possible, not only it is something increasingly hard to do, due to the depredation of the natural world, but also it is not for everyone. Living in synchronicity with natural surroundings has become increasingly exclusive and restricted to the elite, as well as the access to natural and nutritious food and environments, let alone the possibility to talk to anything other than the digital void or close friends. We live in a world where bodies are controlled by (bio)politics (as Foucault has famously and long ago defended), where nurturing and happiness are business (and how costly they are!) and nature is seen by most people as resources that feed the never-ending loop of production-consumption. 

After a dramatic start it is important to say that I believe that we can still revert this situation, and my role as a very privileged human inhabitant of the Earth is to write this text trying to contribute to this shift. I feel deeply about the subjects presented and I am not afraid to admit it. [As many authors state]{.footnote .footnote5},  as all the indigenous communities from my homeland tirelessly state, and as I shall also tirelessly state: That is what is missing, caring enough.

In this place of strong caring that shares territory with great confusion on “what to do”, I had to find a theme for my master thesis. In terms of education, I took my bachelor degree in a Brazilian public university located in the effervescent and multicultural São Paulo and am currently living and working in Milan, Italy. After having concluded my courses in the innovative Politecnico di Milano, I felt like I had to explore what it meant to be in this position, at this time. In what way may I craft, with words and graphics, a threshold through which I leave my university days behind and contribute (even if modestly) as a design researcher to better futures for humans and Nature? How?

Over the past seven years I have unconsciously built a very clear path. Starting with my very first lesson of product design, back in 2014, in which professor Myrna Nascimento asked each one of us to say something about ourselves, the words “I hate when people mistreat insects” came right out of my mouth. 

In my sophomore year I watched a talk in the most prestigious design museum in Brazil, the Museu da Casa Brasileira, in which I had the pleasure to meet an idol of mine at that time, professor Maria Cecilia Loschiavo dos Santos. She closed her brilliant speech on Brazilian wood design urging for the need of design research to receive fresh young minds. So, the next day I looked for her through the halls and asked if I could work with her. From 2015 onwards, we have kept an ongoing collaboration on many projects regarding sustainability, being the most fruitful of our theoretical inquiries on the life and work of José Zanine Caldas. This work was developed alongside the researcher and architect Amanda Beatriz Palma de Carvalho, in which we discuss his pedagogical methods (Carvalho, Santos & Bartholomeu, 2018), his building techniques (Carvalho, Bartholomeu & Santos, 2021a) and his contributions to social innovation (Carvalho, Bartholomeu & Santos, 2021b). Through these experiences with Cecilia, I was introduced to the philosophical depth of design and its implication on environmental and social sustainability, as well as the importance of using the hands to engage the mind. Sustainability became “my thing” and words (scientific research) or wood (the workshop), my mediums of preference.

In 2018, working as an intern in the wood workshop at FAU, I met another great professor who felt as restless as me about the wasted tree branches in our campus. Professor Cyntia Sousa Malaguti dos Santos guided me through a deep, practical, and theoretical research on the wood of invasive tree species _Leucaena leucocephala_ (Bartholomeu, Sousa & Brazolin, 2020) and we explored how design research can play a decisive role in creating circular systems for cities landscapes. In 2020, I assisted her and a group of committed scholars in the organization of the 13th International Seminar NUTAU, whose main theme was urban forest waste valuing, an event that gathered international specialists and Brazilian researchers to discuss possibilities for design in this field traditionally occupied by engineers. My vision of design and sustainability embraced then, through these experiences, the larger economic systems that sustain life in urban centers and the importance for designers to engage in projects for the collectivity in which, many times, they are not present. 

Having come to Milan to enroll in the Integrated Product Design course, an experience that struck me was the Concept Design Studio by professor Stefano Maffei. An episode that allowed me to come closer to digital manufacturing and the [futuring]{.footnote .footnote6} implication of objects, both for people and Nature, also showing how sustainability should also encompass innovation through thinking systemically. With the assistance of Stefano, my visions of design for sustainability have reached the new and unexpected realms of strategic collaborations and public policing.

Finally, it is important to mention my engagement in the For a Relational Design research group since the 2020 Covid-19 outbreak. The group is composed of Brazilian colleagues that I had the pleasure to encounter throughout these years, especially under the guidance of Loschiavo. In our online meetings we have been sharing experiences, looking critically at design, and design research “as usual”, investigating alternative approaches that can dialog with each one’s (very diverse) research. The group has definitely influenced me on much of the critical thinking that will be further explored here, and will hopefully continue to, since we shall keep our exchanges in the near future.

The maturing of my visions of design for sustainability, which went from empathy for other beings to the material, to the object, to the city and finally to complex systems, is clear and asked for dedication and reflection, materialized in the following text. 

This work is something I would call “_theoretical explorations_”, since I will not dive deeply into one single aspect of designing politics of Nature, but seek to acquire a _good sense_ of this theme. A _good sense_, as defined by Australian design philosopher Tony Fry (2011) inspired by the writing of Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci, is “_the product of empirically grounded knowledge and learning from critically reflective experience_” and differs from _common sense_, which is equated to “_mobilization of generalities, unexamined assumptions and unquestioned beliefs in circulation in any given society_” (p. 48). It was, therefore, necessary for me to understand exactly _why_ and _how_ politics, Nature and design are entangled and that is the main research question of this work (RESEARCH QUESTION – WHAT). Therefore, the strategy of active contemplation of alternatives on economic politics and design philosophy/_praxis_ (HOW) is raised with the scope of growing an _education_ on the subject that gives title to this book (WHY).

This education will not only be mine, hopefully. My intent is to provide a rich and comprehensive text in which other young designers that are passionate about sustainability can read and understand the systemic implication of any single thing they will ever come to create; that politics is not far away from our practice; and that sustainability is so much more than what we are able to explore in the short lessons on materials and service design we have at university. Every image collected, every scheme drawn, every table filled are meant to inspire the search for more, as I am presenting the themes discussed in an introductory manner and this field is happily fertile and full of interesting contributions.  

One last thing worth highlighting (if not already quite clear) is the intent on which the work that became this book was carried out. It was born and grew as my master thesis, so the heavy academic research and language used in the text responds to that purpose. However, in order to publish this text as a book, more of my own thoughts and impressions were included. Those potentially differ from the initial academic research by the lack of extensive use of references and by the use of what could be a _less formal_ language. As a result, you find this document: a seamless combination of reporting and thoughts on a subject that is dear to my heart and that I repute of high importance, all filtered through my perspective. 

## Wandering through borders

In one of our readings in the _Por um design relacional_ research group, I came across a useful concept to help me situate myself and my work as a designer from that moment on. And it impacted this book as well. Professors Walter D. Mignolo and Madina V. Tlostanova wrote about what they call “border thinking”, a concept that borrows the geographical concepts of border to express an epistemology that is mixed, historically colonized, but critically trying to break the colonization cycle. As they write, it consists in “incorporation of Western contributions in different domains of life and knowledge into an epistemic and political project that affirms the difference, colonial and/or imperial to which most of the population of the world had been subjected throughout the five hundred years of economic, religious, epistemic imperial expansion and its consequences in the formation of split subjectivities” (Mignolo & Tlostanova, 2016, p. 212).

::ImageRegular
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme2.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 500px;"
subtitle: Scheme 2. The scheme represents this work as a “permeable membrane” between the fields to which it is connected. By the author.
---
::

Having grown up with Western and Southern influences, I cannot say I will ever be able to express “pure” thinking (can anyone?). I, therefore, declare the border, a philosophical and epistemological space in which my work shall root and bloom.

The borders are characterized by Mignolo & Tlostanova (2016) as “_not only geographic but also political, subjective (e.g., cultural) and epistemic and, contrary to frontiers, the very concept of ‘border’ implies the existence of people, language, religions and knowledge on both sides linked through relations established by the coloniality of power._” (p. 208). I believe this is a good opportunity to stretch the limits of this concept outlined by the authors for the social sciences, adding the sustainability issue to the melting pot. It is also in the frontiers of ecology, social sciences, and economics that what I am calling _Designing politics of Nature_ emerges and finds a fertile field to grow. It is essential for this kind of politics to be situated in between, acting as a permeable membrane of connection between these vital yet many times still seen as independent fields in the life of a community. This conception, though not new, still needs encouragement.

### The systemic challenge 

::ImageRegular
---
src: /9786599492931/images/img2.jpg
subtitle: Image 2. Paula Antonelli’s launching speech for the 22nd Triennale di Milano in November 2017. On the screen we see a picture of the COP 23, a room full of scientists, specialists and government representatives. However, almost no entities related to design, what she puts as “one of the biggest problems in the world”, meaning that it is extremely dangerous that design is not a participant, in smaller and bigger scale, in important decisions. 
---
::

The crisis the beings living on Earth face ahead is one of political, socioeconomic, and ecological nature. Not just political, or socioeconomic, or ecological, but all three, deeply connected and indissociable. In this sense, a simplistic vision of Nature comprising just the environment intended as the vegetable world will not do. 

Nature, in the sense that Paola Antonelli intended in her launching speech for the themes for the 2019 [Triennale]{.footnote .footnote7}  is “_Nature in the 21st century terms, . . . thinking also of social ecosystems, not only thinking of oceans and forests._” This complex notion is also defended by many [cultures and movements]{.footnote .footnote8} that understand and value the connection of all beings that exist. A valuable work for comprehending the impact of revaluing the concept of Nature is presented by Brazilian indigenous activist Ailton Krenak, a potent voice who speaks from and for the maintenance of indigenous peoples’ ancient knowledge. In his talk, published as a book in 2019 entitled _Ideias para adiar o fim do mundo_ (Ideas to postpone the end of the world), Krenak explains that this conceptual and even emotional separateness between us and what we learned to call _nature_ is an issue that must be surpassed if we intend to “postpone the end of the world”. We should, he defends, accept Nature as a complex materialization of many different shapes, including us, humans.

Following the presented worldviews, what will be referred in this work as Nature (with a capital N) entails therefore a physical and spiritual vision of _all that is from the Earth_, including ourselves, human beings, in contrast with the word _nature_ (in lowercase) that might be used to specify a way of being (the nature of). 

The comprehension of Nature in this work must be stretched, tensioned, and hopefully it will not defy a clearer communication. However, amplifying its meaning is a necessary response to the challenges we face: complex entanglements between the poignant and most visible effects of our failing system, such as climate change or extreme poverty, make it difficult to grasp a way out and, therefore, require theoretical reactions with the same complex reasoning. The traditional vision of simplified and universal proposals for confronting the major challenges that threaten Nature’s life will not be enough. We must search for inspiration in broader systemic visions (Solón, 2019).

::ImageRegular
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme3.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 500px; margin-bottom: 2em;"
subtitle: Scheme 3. Nature with a capital N will encompass a broad notion that is not so common. It included humans, natural processes, animals and beings of spiritual nature.
---
::

The expression “_Politics of Nature_”, which is one of the protagonists of a master thesis from the design field, was notoriously used by French social philosopher Bruno Latour, who explored in his homonymous 1999 book the powerful and necessary connection between science, politics and society to tackle environmental issues on a political level. Letting aside the discussion about the strategic choices to deal with this matter (which will be done throughout the chapters of this work), those simple and strong three words summarize the vastness of human economy. As he says, there has never been “_. . . any other politics than the politics of nature, and there has never been any other nature than the nature of politics._” (Latour, 1999 as cited in Fry, 2011, p. 29). As we will see, those three words contain an incredibly vast history of survival, domination, epistemological suppression, and spiritual (dis/re) connection. It is as historical as visionary. It is, maybe more than all, urgently contemporary. 

Though there are many differing ideas on how we can start working on these pressing issues, if there is one thing most of us agree with is that it will be a long journey. It will probably entail massive planning and a vast amount of effort, involving the work of hundreds of thousands of people for a decade or more (Fry, 2011). Therefore, how can design help? Fry argues that we can borrow deconstructive tactics, typical from the philosophy field, and apply it to this remodeling of our systems:  

> Getting to the foundation of things (the underpinning of why they exist and what they do) means working on “things”, so they can be rendered politically naked and then differently politically reclothed. (Fry, 2011, p. 105)

This is where I invite you to read my work on the design-Nature-politics nexus, starting by the _unveiling_ of this system, searching to outline its structures and frameworks; then studying how design might aid, philosophically and practically, in its _reclothing_.

::ImageFull
---
title: Content organization
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme4.svg
subtitle: Scheme 4. The map of this thesis with research questions of each chapter and part.
---
::

### Navigating this book

> The majority of designers are not trained to think critically about socio-technical problems and ethical challenges that are raised by emerging technologies. Furthermore, many designers have limited experience working on projects that defy the boundaries of a typical corporate design brief. (Forlano, 2016, p. 43) 

This is a dense theoretical work. To make it easier to navigate through, I organized a circular map in which the readers can find themselves in the chapters and always remember what the purpose of the discussion in that specific chapter is.

A –In part A lies the discussion about Nature and politics.

Chapter 1 –Starting from the outside, the reader will start exploring the connection between Nature and politics, and the implication of this nexus inside the paradigms of development that guide our economy. 

Chapter 2 –In the second chapter, the roots of the thoughts that guided the process discussed in Chapter 1 will be unveiled.

Chapter 3 –The intermediary part of the map represents the alternatives to our contemporary economic paradigm that seems to be destructive towards Nature. In this part the essence of each alternative will be distilled to guide the conclusions of this work. 

B –Part B brings the discussion about design and its relation to the subjects previously discussed.

Chapter 1 –In the first chapter a definition of design will be outlined as well as a swift historical discussion of its roots.

Chapter 2 – The second chapter delves into the design world looking for insight in design history and contemporary nontraditional design practices that propose interesting approaches in response to the socio environmental crisis we live in today.

C –In this final part we will share some conclusive thoughts, last words, references, and annex documentation.

It is important to highlight that some unusual expressions will be used strategically or in accordance with the ethical standpoint of this author. The choice of writing Nature with a capital N has been previously clarified. Natural elements and objects (mountains, plants, dirt, animals) will be called _natural beings_. Calling them as such, besides shifting their objectifying and depreciating status of _things_, is particularly useful in this work as it helps us build empathy and closeness to their often trivialized existence. This disruption, as we will see, is important for the breakdown of the political-socio-economic-environmental crisis we find ourselves in. 

#### Symbols and markers

To make the text easier to follow, we established [meeting points!]{.highlight} at the beginning of each chapter, which will introduce the discussion that will be developed. The language in the meeting point is simpler, more informal, and uses questions to instigate the topic. This strategy was inspired by my colleague and design researcher Bruna Montuori (2018), who used this drawn from British anthropologist Tim Ingold in her thesis. 

As we are entering strange and complex theoretical territory, the most valuable information was systematized using symbols. The symbols used are: 

(1) Circle: [“How might we”]{.highlight} questions. These questions will be used to summarize the main contents of the chapter or subchapter that has been just read. It is a result of our critical reading as a way to advance the raw contributions to a new level of sophistication, as modest as those can be. “How might we” questions, often used in [_design thinking_ methods]{.footnote .footnote9},  work as starting points for projects, as those are questions that “frame the problem”. Here we are not framing problems but using this tool as a way of organizing the insights as an incredibly generative sequence of words that will shed light on the topics. The symbol that follows them is a circle with a dot inside, inspired by the representation of the life-giving Sun in the world of astrology, Ñamandú, or the Big Mystery for the Guarani people of Brazil. 

(2) [Single words or expressions highlighted: Throughout the text some words or expressions are highlighted. These are interesting and important concepts to the discussion presented]{.highlight}. 
