---
title: 'Systemic sustainability, by Clara de Souza Bartholomeu  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
navigation:
  title: 'Part B'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492931/css/style-purple.css">

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# Part B
::

::PageFull{.hide-mobile .hide-single-column}
&nbsp;
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 1. Design, politics<br> and _Nature_
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
> Under these circumstances, it is not enough for designers to be politically and chemically correct. “Organic”, “green”, “environmental”, and “sustainable” are buzzwords that have been applied in earnest to design – including food and fashion – over the last two decades, as have “ethical” and “aware”. Yet, despite these noble intentions, we are still, as individuals and communities, tracking a course of destruction through overconsumption and disregard for countless forms of life, including our own. Much design has been violent. (Antonelli, 2019)
::

### 1.1 Meeting point!

In this part of the book, we are going to look into design: how it is related to the socio-environmental-political crisis and how it can be part of a redirection of our individual or collective actions towards a more futuring culture. We shall start from analyzing briefly why design has been an ally of the aggressive hegemonic culture that we have studied in part A; then we will see some of the ways in which the alliance of design and sustainability has been unrolled in the last decades, by whom and following what visions; and finally we will see in more detail four design angles that can be analyzed and be part of a positive response to the crisis in politics of Nature. 

### 1.2 Where does design fit?

Much design has been violent. How come? To initiate the arguments on this topic, one might find useful defining _what design is_ - even though any attempt to do so seems forever insufficient.

Starting by borrowing the ample yet reasonable definition by Austrian designer Victor Papanek, design can be seen as “the conscious action to impose meaningful order”. Or, in other words, it’s about using creativity and technique to achieve a desired outcome (be the outcome well defined or not). This definition helps the analysis attempted in this work since it fits the many fashions in which design has been performed throughout history, crafting to industrial applications, to its contemporary multi-disciplinarity. This definition is also interesting because it is not centered in a legitimated figure (the _design professional_) and allows to include people that are not connected to the design field and even non-human beings in the activity (a bird is surely conscious that it is building a nest when it does so). This may seem silly at first, but, if we think about all we have studied so far in this book, around the issues of agency and power, it is an important step towards detaching design from the principles of hegemony. Furthermore, this notion of design, in its simplicity and non-attachment to a specific economic activity, allows interesting possibilities for the future. 

The origins of design are debated: according to some it comes from the crafting activities enrolled by people since the first shaping of tools (about 2.5 million years ago); according to others, the vast majority, design was born with the Industrial Revolution (starting around the second half of the 18th century). The matter of what are the roots of design (crafting or optimizing products for producing and selling) is an interesting and necessary debate that will not, however, be performed in this book. It is enough for now to understand that most designers place the establishment of our profession along with the ascent of the industrial activities and the modern lifestyle, as, in fact, it became a recognized profession then.  

Returning to the question highlighted in the title of this section, the answer is now (after many pages of theoretical delight since the first pages of this work), very simple. As a practice that became recognized and expanded alongside and in service of the rise of industrialization, it would be difficult for design to detach conceptually from these paradigms. Put simply and swiftly, all the negative and nature-depredating critiques that concern politics and economics apply also to the traditional applications of design. 

### 1.3 The first critiques to the unsustainability of design

We can find deeper analysis of all of these statements in the words of Victor Papanek and Argentinian design philosopher Tomas Maldonado, known as the pioneering critics of industrial design in the 20th century. As Papanek (1972) famously wrote as the first lines of his _Design for the Real World_:  _“There are professions more harmful than industrial design, but only a very few of them”_ (p. 14). This impactful choice of words was unprecedented, as design had rarely, until then, been regarded as an extremely influential practice, let alone dangerous. He continues:

> Today, industrial design has put murder on a mass production basis. By designing criminally unsafe automobiles that kill or maim nearly one million people around the world each year, by creating whole new species of permanent garbage to clutter up the landscape and by choosing materials and processes that pollute the air we breathe, designers have become a dangerous breed. And the skills needed in these activities are carefully taught to young people. (p. 14) 

The educational component of his argument is relevant. As a professor who lectured in different parts of the world, Papanek was able to perceive the influence the university could have on future professionals in the market. As he describes, by the time he lectured (before writing the _Design for the Real World_) there was no book that discussed critically the noxious outcomes of design and that offered alternatives on the practice. So he wrote one himself. Gladly, he does not only provide a detailed (and well-illustrated) analysis of the problems of design as it was up until 1972, but also a vision on what it should be.

> Design must be an innovative, highly creative, cross-disciplinary tool responsive to the true needs of men. It must be more research-oriented and we must stop defiling the earth itself with poorly designed objects and structures. (p. 15). 

In the book, before proposing his approach to design, Papanek takes a step back and looks into design’s history to contextualize its failure. He describes the rise of the profession with the support of Henry Dreyfuss’ _Designing for people_ (published in 1955), in which the need for a figure who would aid the industry in the creation of optimized products during the Industrial Revolution is appointed as the foundation stone of the field. By placing the birth of design along the development of industrial activities, design thinkers from the 20th century such as Papanek and Dreyfuss frame the design field inside the realm of the manufacturing of objects and in the time arch of the rise of modernity. Though questionable (Papanek himself admits that other theorists place the birth of design on the prehistoric rise of human’s ability to make tools), this understanding is useful to comprehend and support design critiques as an activity strongly connected to the advances of modernity. The argument becomes increasingly clear as Papanek (1972) continues: _“. . . it was not until Walter Gropious founded the German Bauhaus in 1919, that an uneasy marriage between art and machine was achieved. No design school in history has had greater influence in shaping taste and design than the Bauhaus.”_ (p. 44). 

According to the author, the influence that Bauhaus has had reverberated throughout the decades (and by now, centuries) since most curricula of design schools all over the world followed the basis of their design course. As creatively effervescent and disrupting as the Bauhausian experience might have been, it was still bound to the modern missions of explorations on rationalism and functionalism. A model of design education in which the debate revolves around the many possible interactions of form and function, subordinated to the structures of a system that is based in the consumption of goods and services, can only result in a defuturing practice. 

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme14.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 14. Diagram extracted from Papanek (1970) p. 68."
---
::

Back to Papanek, in the long term, designers had become professionals disconnected from the true needs of most people, working for the small and powerful percentage of the population. And this dedication of designers to the wrong “problems” (framed by industrialists who intended to accumulate their resources) helped, according to him, to develop a “Kleenex Culture” (Kleenex is a brand of disposable tissues), meaning that while individual possession is valued, durability is not.

It could only be reversed if designers regained consciousness of our social responsiveness and environmental responsibility and turned around design culture from what it was in the 1970s: [the role of the designer would not be to subordinate to companies, but to assist design-able communities to create solutions to their own problems]{.highlight}. Finally, he adds the conservation of Nature as an essential element of care for the profession: 

> If design is ecologically responsive, then it is also revolutionary. All systems – capitalist, state socialist, and mixed economies – are built on the assumption that we must buy more, consume more, waste more, throw away more, and consequently destroy Liferaft Earth. If design is to be ecologically responsible, it must be independent of concern for gross national product (no matter how gross that may be). (Papanek, 1972, p. 241)

This work was one of the first to approach environmental responsibility for the practitioners of this field. A second pioneer important to mention is Tomás Maldonado, Argentinian artist and design philosopher who wrote about the urgent needs to consider the influence of our projects on the environment in his inaugural book _Design, Nature and Revolution: Toward a critical ecology_. In this intense and intriguing work, he discourses about many concepts that he considered pertinent to understanding the connection between the field, politics, and the environment (both natural and man-made). His analyses thoroughly examines each term, offering insight in its pertinence for design, city planning and, consequently, the life of people in urban environments.

::ImageFull{.float-left.w-full}
---
src: /9786599492931/images/img4.jpg
subtitle: "Scheme 14. Visualization from the Dome Over Manhattan by Fuller and Sadao. Source: https://www.nytimes. com/2016/11/18/nyregion/new-york-today-our-city-that-never-was.html"
---
::

In his critique of the design-nature-politics nexus, he remarks the difference between his views and those of Buckminster Fuller. The North American architect is mostly well known for designing large scale geodesic structures from the decade of 1950 on. _“The opposite of design is chaos”_, he writes, in a text intriguingly typed for the introduction of Papanek’s _Design for the Real World_ (he claims that even though both had radically different views of the political application of design, they respected and admired each other's work). Fuller found designs _raison d’être_ in the perfect geometries found in nature, which are responsible for holding our body tissues together and allow plants to grow and life to exist (what he calls subjective design). Through his hands, projects that connected these extremely rationalistic and generative shapes to high technology in response to the cries of the scientific society about our imminent environmental catastrophe. Probably the most iconic of these projects is the Dome Over Manhattan, a project in which Fuller and Asian American architect Shoji Sadao envision the metropolis enclosed in a geodesic bubble, which, in their theory, would reduce its use of energy by 20% by creating a greenhouse effect. Interestingly, figures such as Buckminster Fuller spread a vision of design that was rather popular in the 20th century: that design and technology could hold back the environmental crisis, or at least, hold it away from human beings.

Though Maldonado, as Fuller, highly regards the importance of technology to the innovation in design and the construction of a new society (in contrast with Papanek who focuses his theory, at least discursively, around design methods and philosophy), the space politics occupies in their world visions oppose. Maldonado writes that, while the architect believes in a “Revolution by Design”, that is, the idea that technology might replace the function of politics by its ability to solve humanity's problems (what Maldonado calls a _technocratic utopianism_), he understands that this revolution would only makes sense if there is a “Design by Revolution”, which is the construction of a collective world based on political praxis, radically against designers nihilism (p. 29). 

This statement praises the political power of design inside a society and denounces the risk of not recognizing it. To make these concepts more tangible, we can go back to Papanek when he says that the role attributed to the creators of “things” is also one of selecting tools and operations of production and usage. And in fact, when one analyses what it takes to make “things” materialize, it's clear that many philosophical, mechanical and chemical processes are involved. There are visions, strategies and tangible results that have a direct impact on Nature and in people's lives. This understanding helps us build an important bridge to why and how design impacts directly politics of Nature, and why, even in its first manifestations, sustainable-minded design was already inevitably political.

### 1.4 The evolution of Design for Sustainability

From _“Design for The Real World”_ in the 1970s and what we have today, much has happened. Design itself has shifted in many levels, from the internal logic to its connection to other fields of knowledge, as we can see in Table 5 drawn from Escobar (2019, p. 34). Design evolved from a mostly industrial activity (essentially related to the production of material culture) into a form of experience-based thinking (related to the organization of experiences, be them material or immaterial) (Escobar, 2019, p. 37; Forlano, 2016). 

::ImageFull{.float-left.w-full}
---
src: /9786599492931/tables/table5.svg
subtitle: Table 5. Shows relevant shifts in design’s traits from the 20th century to the present. Extracted from Escobar (2019, p. 34).
---
::

Meanwhile, the questionings on the unsustainability of design covered many different perspectives, ranging from the condemnation of programmed obsolescence to the creation of systems for disassembly and recycling, pervading the matter of social innovation. Many theoretical and practical initiatives are part of what we can call the history of Design for Sustainability (DfS), or design that has at its center the aim of being positive for politics of Nature. 

These many propositions for DfS were carefully registered by researchers Idil Gaziulusoy and Fabrizio Ceschin (2016, 2019) in a paper and then in their book “Design for Sustainability: A Multi-level Framework from Products to Socio-technical Systems'' (2020). With an analysis starting from Papanek and Fuller, going through the concepts of Green Design, Design for Sustainable Behavior, System Design, and so on, they offer an “overview of the evolution of the response from the design discipline to sustainability issues” (Gaziulusoy & Ceschin, 2016, p. 120), explaining what, for them, the most relevant contributions in this field are. This information is gathered in Table 6, borrowed from their work. 

::ImageFull{.float-left.w-full}
---
src: /9786599492931/tables/table6.svg
subtitle: Table 6. Overview of DfS approaches in chronological order of their development, extracted from Ceschin and Gaziulusoy, 2020, p. 142.
---
::

The authors analyze the many DfS approaches based on four innovation levels: 

(1) product innovation level; 

(2) Product-Service System innovation level.

(3) Spatio-social innovation level. 

(4) Socio-Technical System innovation level.


These levels coincidently follow a fairly chronological order (see Scheme 15), responding to sociotechnical megatrends that unavoidably impact the design practice. In this sense, DfS that was once more focused on technical aspects of _sustainable products_ becomes part of a range of tools for fomenting _sociotechnical sustainable transitions_. To summarize, the authors (_Ceschin and Gaziulusoy_, 2020, p. 151) state that they could identify _three main characterizing aspects of DfS’s evolution_: 

- _a widening of the design scope, from insular to systemic design;_
- _a shift from technocentric design to human- centric design;_
- _an expansion of the sustainability focus._

Even if we can recognize a growing multidimensionality in DfS along the decades, the authors highlight that though it seems like we have been _progressing_ (yes, this word again!), all levels of DfS are relevant if we wish to impact the system: from the product-level technical solutions to the large-scale techno-social systemic initiatives, only with [pervasive strategies]{.highlight} can we guarantee sufficient impact. What then is going to change majorly from one approach to the other is the set of skills designers will need for confronting challenges, either a more technical or social scope.

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme15.svg
subtitle: Scheme 15. The evolution of the DfS field, extracted from _Ceschin and Gaziulusoy_, 2020, p. 149.
---
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
&nbsp;
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 2. Design <br>explorations
::

### 2.1 Meeting Point!

In the next chapters, we are going to inquire how design may manifest, considering the socio economic challenges outlined in PART A and the unsustainable aspects of design we have just explored. The following pages aim at providing insight through the introduction of a selection of design themes that somehow shine light on relevant points to our discussion.

The first step will be to recap important aspects that design processes should embrace in order to function towards the positive politics of Nature, and that includes thinking on how design is done, what is it made from, how it may impact governance and which visions of the future it entails. After discussion based on these four questions, we will summarize the learnings in potential roles of the design process in positive socio economic shifts related to Nature, as well as how it could be applied in a wide view.

### 2.2 And what are we looking for?

Though design and sustainability have been interacting and providing interesting results, the outcome of this book is about how to go further including the realm of the _political_ into the design-sustainability nexus. Therefore, using the information metabolized in part A, we have a map of relevant socio political angles that would positively impact politics of Nature from an ample historical and deep perspective. And what about design? 

As a tool to create ways of doing and being in the world, we can look critically into the design profession, its processes and outcomes, to better align it to these strategies. 

From the map that summarizes the key finds from this research presented in Part A, we are able to connect the sociopolitical strategies and sustainable design process on four main questions:

1. **How is the design done?** – A reflection of the design process in itself: by whom, following what process, affecting who directly and indirectly, engaging what kind of relation among stakeholders.
2. **What is it made from?** – A reflection on resources and impact: what materials and processes are involved in the materialization of concepts.
3. **How does it impact governance?** – A reflection on power: How does design connect to the relations of power that exist between the individuals or groups impacted by the process? What kind of political dynamics does it foment?
4. **Which vision does it feed?** – A reflection on narratives. What is the impact of design in visions of the future and the creation of the future itself? 

And if we want to suggest some characteristics to what is design that provokes positive politics of Nature, based on our previous discussions, we could infer: 


1. **How is design done?** <br>Design is done by actively breaking down systemic oppressions itself and by enabling communities to flourish in autonomy and symbiosis. It is a process that can be mutually enhancing for people and the rest of Nature, having the respect/maintenance of life as the highest value. 

2. **What is it made from?**<br>Products and services are based on materials and processes that fight predatory extraction, which come from the local reality and potentially are part of local sustainable traditions. Materials are platforms for sustainable life enhancement.

3. **How does it impact governance?**<br>Design looks into the political context and participates in reshaping oppressive systems, by amplifying access to political decisions and including Nature in the equation. 

4. **Which vision does it feed?**<br>The design process and its outcomes should seek the communities’ own visions of a happy, healthy, and balanced life that includes the wellbeing of Nature and is based in sustainable value concepts.

It is surely not as simple as it sounds, but these are important directions for design if we want to pursue the strategies outlined for building new economies and politics. These should by no means be viewed as definite guides or a strict selection of attributes, but more as an organization of all the research carried out for this work so far. And now, in the last part of this book, we will explore some design concepts/fields of study that I believe have been responding to these visions and use them to discuss the angles just described. All design approaches mentioned were selected not as perfect examples of what to do, but as interesting axes of discussion for the final outcomes of this book. 

### 2.3 How is design done - the process

A first step to turning design into a tool for positive politics of Nature is looking into the design process itself. As we said, it can be an active space for breaking down systemic oppressions and by strategically looking into its internal dynamics and critically analyzing its outcomes. Drawing from Papanek and Maldonado, the goal in doing design moves from _creating functional or aesthetic efficiency to enabling beings to create and live sustainably_ through the design process.

And if design is ontological and has a great power over many peoples and non-humans’ lives, it is not difficult to conclude that it would be authoritarian to leave the task in the hands of a few individuals enclosed in a studio creating “things” and “ways” by themselves. This seemingly simple shift has actually had a great impact in all aspects of the design process, from the brief that would no longer arrive ready to go, to the creation phase up to the outcome. In fact, again highlighting the suggestions from Papanek, design can be practiced by the clients _themselves_, moderated by design experts trained to provide _support_.

There have been studies and movements towards this logic in different ways, and we are going to look briefly into three of them as axis of discussion: Design Thinking, which had a great impact in opening the design field; Social Innovation, which aims at enabling communities to create their own solutions; and Post-Anthropocentric Design, which looks into the possibility of welcoming non-human beings as stakeholders of the design process. 

#### 2.3.1 Amplifying participation and agency through Design Thinking

When talking about opening the design process to non-designer people (or to contexts that are not design-specific), one relevant movement in design history is Design Thinking. It has had a special influence in the recognition of design as, in fact, a _process_ that could be applied in many contexts even outside industrial realities. On this precise reasoning, we can draw from the words of Escobar (2019): 

> There is no doubt . . . that a relatively new brand of design theorists is emerging; the new theories are to some extent a result of taking design practices beyond their established domains, including in social service and environmental areas, for-profit consulting firms staffed by interdisciplinary research teams, community based non-governmental organizations and design outfits, and even social movements. Design thinking has become a key trope in this context. (p. 36)

Known as the solution-seeking approach that designers had long used in their projects, it was developed and diffused as a set of tools and activities to respond to [_wicked problems_]{.highlight}. It was popularized initially and mainly by the Bay-Area design company Ideo during the 1990s and has gained increased attention in the following decades.

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme16.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 16. Representation of the Double Diamond process that is the basis of Design Thinking. Consists of three phases: inspiration, ideation and implementation. Extracted from https://www.ideo.org/tools Access: 08.02.2021 "
---
::

Summarized by former Ideo CEO Tim Brown (2008), it is _“a discipline that uses the designer’s sensibility and methods to match people’s needs with what is technologically feasible and what a viable business strategy can convert into customer value and market opportunity”_ (p. 02).  In other words, it is a set of procedures that, starting from a problem, proposes a solution that is valuable to the user and positively impacts the local economy. It is also well known for its _human-centered approach_, once that the problem is only defined after deep study of the user's context, done _“often with a degree of ethnographic detail”_, as describes Escobar (2019, p. 36). It should be a universal toolkit, to work everywhere, with people with different cultures and backgrounds. Of course something would go wrong with that.

Among the attentive reviewers of the _universality_ praised by this approach is design anthropologist Dori Tunstall (2013), a relevant scholar of the decolonization studies, who offers a clear perspective on its criticalities. By imposing a one-way approach to problem-solving, design thinking practices (as they had been applied on international projects, especially those with non-Western communities), may overlook and terminate traditional and autochthonous knowledge of people under a premise of bringing innovation in their attempt to show _“a better way of doing things”_, in the end, _“of living”_. Thus, it would be operating on the same logic of the hegemonic powers of imperialism. She also argues that it is important not to center the figure of the designer (similarly to figure of the savior) on the search for the response to the community's issues while they might passively listen. It must be an active exchange, led by the community and fully respectful to their histories and [value systems\[54\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote54}. 

Another aspect that must be highlighted, as obvious as it can be, is anthropocentrism in human-centered design (VESELOVA, 2019). By reaffirming the logic of men at the center of the cycles of life is to insist on an incomplete vision of our economy. It is not meant here that human-centered design cannot be environmentally sustainable, on the contrary, as it proposes to be a process of true listening of communities, it has great potential to be so. However, the design thinking model that has been diffused by Ideo and has arrived to the many marketing and engineering sectors of multinational companies does not carry a strong message of our need to redesign this economy not only in terms of reducing socioeconomic inequalities but also our very human relationship with our environment and with [Nature\[55\]]{.footnote .footnote55}. 

One of its virtues, in this author's view, is to render the design process approachable and spread it through well described simple tools, such as _brainstorming_, which foments more collaborative creative processes. This aesthetic and operative simplicity has helped our field to be recognized, understood, and adopted by many, in some ways empowering them to create viable alternatives for their lives. Nevertheless, on this note, it is important to appoint that this same contemporary minimal design, easy to grasp, do-what-you-want language leads design to perform a kind of [_neutrality_]{.highlight}, the same neutrality that science and the many institutions who, even when acting from good will, used to establish hegemonic power. Maybe the lessons learnt from our critical analysis of Design Thinking can lead us to new approaches that avoid these issues, and, maybe, in these new possibilities for design lies the co-creation of politics of Nature.

[How might we design politics of Nature including non-designers in the process, while not imposing our preconceptions and biases, but offering support in different contexts?]{.highlight}

#### 2.3.2 Design as social innovation

And from opening up the design process to actually encouraging it to be performed by non-designers themselves is an important step. The rich field of design for social innovation has been focused on developing ways to encourage people to engage in projects in and for their own communities. More precisely, Ceschin and Gaziulusoy (2020) defend that this movement _“covers a broad range of activities; however, the defining factor is that it aims to address socially relevant issues” and that “social innovation actors are mostly the owners of the problems they are addressing and they operate on a bottom- up and self-organized basis.”_ (p. 103). In these processes, the output is completely malleable and related to the development of the project, ranging from products, to services, to systems. 

One noticeable contributor to the field is the Italian design researcher Ezio Manzini in his _Design, when everybody designs: an introduction to design for social innovation_ (2015),  who studied ways for distributed agency in the design and innovation processes. He explores the potential of design for social and environmental change through a reconceptualization of the design practice that becomes focused in enabling [_grassroots innovations_\[56\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote56} and the design agency, transferred to all participants of the innovation process. Similar to Papanek, Manzini sees potentiality in alternative design processes that are collective and in which the designer is a mediator, however adding the conceptualization of [_distributed systems_]{.highlight} as a contemporary strategy to make these happen. These systems are pictured as a wide network of decentralized elements that form a connected yet independent movement. It suggests design and social innovation can happen in a small, local, open, and connected context (SLOC) to form a large-scale and revolutionary chain for change (Manzini, 2015, p. 178). 

While the work in Design for Social Innovation [flourishes in many contexts\[57\]]{.footnote .footnote57}, there lies a question of the it’s effective applicability in contexts in which communities may not have the power to address their own challenges. By these I mean communities who may be torn from their right to decide on their organization, or in contexts in which design simply cannot help amid socio-political complexities. In other words, communities that may have been partially or completely stripped of autonomy. Above all in non-European or non-North American contexts, this discussion is latent, since a long-term application of dominance and oppression may be addressed as a main issue. 

This problem is well discussed by Escobar (2019), who explores the concept of autonomy as a central goal for a design thought, above all in South American contexts, where the studies that culminated in his book _Designs for the Pluriverse_ took place. The author compares the socio-cultural-political system that is the [_Pluriverse_\[58\]]{.footnote .footnote58} to the biological organization present in many spheres of Nature, in which components flourish in symbiosis but remain true to their essence. In practical terms, this would translate in the ability of an entity (or a community) to self-define and self-organize in face of all sorts of challenges, while maintaining a high degree of relationality towards the outer elements of the system. _Autonomy_ is not a break from relationality and mutual care, but only possible through it. 

The main points in designing for _autonomy_ would then be in reversing (or avoiding) the long terms effect of colonization and oppression, by fostering ways of _“learning, healing, dwelling, producing, and so forth that are freer from heteronomous commands and regulation”_ (Escobar, 2019, p. 181). This reasoning invites us to go beyond the logics of the State and capital, of course, but also our roles as designers in the process. While contributing to the design of alternative ways of living and doing in the world, the designer should never lose sight of what is essential: that the system is self-organized. Trying to guide a design practice that are guided by this thought, the author outlines five relevant aspects it should embrace: 

> (1) Every community practices the design of itself: its organizations, its social relations, its practices, its relation to the environment. If for most of history communities practiced a sort of “natural design” independent of expert knowledge (ontonomy, spontaneous coping), contemporary situations involve design based on both detached and embodied forms of reflection.
>
> (2) Every design activity must start with the strong presupposition that people are practitioners of their own knowledge and from there must examine how people themselves understand their reality. This epistemological, ethical, and political principle is at the basis of both autonomy and autonomous design. (Conventional development planning is intended to get people to practice somebody else’s knowledge, namely, the experts’!)
>
> (3) What the community designs, in the first instance, is an inquiring or learning system about itself. As designers, we may become co-researchers with the community, but it is the latter that investigates its own reality in the codesign process.
>
> (4) Every design process involves a statement of problems and possibilities that enables the designer and the group to generate agreements about objectives and to decide among alternative courses of action (concerning the contamination of the river, the impact of large-scale mining, a particular food-production project, landlessness, the struggle to defend place and culture, discrimination against women, availability of water, etc.). The result should be a series of scenarios and possible paths for the transformation of practices or the creation of new ones.20
>
> (5) This exercise may take the form of building a model of the system that generates the problem of communal concern. Given this model, the question that every autonomous design project must face is: what can we do about it? The answer will depend on how complex the model of reality is. The concrete result is the design of a series of tasks, organizational practices, and criteria by which to assess the performance of the inquiry and design task.” (Escobar, 2019, p. 184)

While many aspects of _Design for Social Innovations_ inhabit _Design for Autonomy_, there is an undeniable direct political and decolonial content in the latter. The design process is permeated by [self-reflection and a consciousness of the territory, relying more on questions than on solutions]{.highlight}. Both approaches can foster the nurturing of autonomous communities, but with their differing points, address more adequately differing socio-historical contexts. 

[How might we design politics of Nature that foster autonomous sustainable communities considering their socio-historical contexts?]{.highlight}

#### 2.3.3 Non anthropocentric design in hybrid societies

Although _society_ is a word almost exclusively used to describe an organized group of people, it is commonly applied with spatial implications (the society _of a place_), also defining a geographical area. In this sense, the space in question is not only populated by humans, but also other animals, plants, objects, and immaterial entities [(we might be talking about the _light_, _sounds_ or even the _internet_)\[59\]]{.footnote .footnote59},  that participate actively in the organization and dynamics of life. A comprehension of such a society that is no longer constituted of people but of human and no-human agents had been endorsed before by James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis in the 1970s with their Paradigm of Gaia. This notion unveils an extra group of agents to the complexity of our system, representing, for design, a call to look at unexplored challenges. What kind of posture should designers have in a world that sees society as an intricate mass of human and non-human beings, together with immaterial entities? Design researcher Laura Forlano (2016) explores this question:

> The intensifying complexity of socio-technical systems make it illogical to continue applying the same models and methods, which have often been stripped of their context and politics. Rather, it is necessary to derive new frameworks that can cope with complexity in a time of great economic and environmental crisis. (p. 45) 

Forlano tries to outline proposals for a redesign of our systems (she refers mostly to the socio-technical space of the contemporary city) drawing insights from authors of the Science and Technology Studies (STS) field (such as Latour or Donna Haraway, for example), a branch of sociology that looks into how society, culture, and politics affect and are affected by scientific research and technological innovation. According to her, these authors can provide valuable insights for design researchers and practitioners, as they have been examining the human-nonhuman [assemblage\[60\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote60}  (the social sum of people and technology, the second ranging from rudimental tools to sophisticated electronics) for a long time. The analysis of many texts and discourses comes down to a simple and (very) generative question: _how might designers move away from the paradigms of Human Centered Design to embrace the problems and needs of non-humans as well?_ She writes: 

> The potential of non anthropocentric design surely goes far beyond what is today considers “sustainable design”, which might be understood as fulfilling human needs with incrementally more sustainable products and services. Instead, non anthropocentric design could radically shift our experience of the world and allow us to dramatically reevaluate our “needs” and, instead, find pathways towards asking the right questions of corporations, governments, and of ourselves as designers. Designers who consider the nonhuman might find themselves reorganizing entire social and environmental systems. (Forlano, 2016, p. 50)

More specifically on the human-Nature entanglement, design researcher Emilija Veselova (2019) also criticizes the limitations of Human Centered Design and proposes that, in an ideal scenario, _“all design could be clarified as design for sustainable entangled human-nature systems”_ (p. 02). With the support of Connectedness With Nature theories, she indicates the many opportunities for design intervention and the priorities based on the extensive research carried out by Zylstra and colleagues (2014), both previously presented in this work.  

Veselova further proposes that designers recognize and include natural entities as stakeholders in each and all creation processes, thus redefining “good design” as _“design that supports the long-term sustainability of the entanglement human-nature systems”_ (p. 04). This would be a radical shift on how design is done and thought of until this very day. But how specifically could one do that?

While the potential inclusion of natural non-human beings through their inclusion in Co-design or Participatory Design processes is being explored by her, Veselova reminds us also of the importance of collaboration between designers and people who are able to understand the needs of these natural stakeholders, whether scientists or indigenous communities. Indeed, the field for collaborations between designers and non-human beings through technology is an important theme to many designers in the development of new materials, a topic that we will look further into in the next chapter. 

In the meanwhile, it may not yet be completely clear how this human and non-human design interaction will happen. That is a topic that raises concern on design professionals. Nevertheless, this author believes that the research developed by Veselova and other researchers looking into the inclusion of nonhumans as stakeholders in the design process is contemporary, pertinent, and promising. Hopefully in the near future its new outcomes will take us one step closer to not designing _for_ Nature but _with_ Nature. 

[How might we design politics of Nature including non-human beings in the design process?]{.highlight}

### 2.4 What it is made from: materials and processes for sustainable flourishing

#### 2.4.1 The role of materials for politics of Nature 

The questions and struggles from part of the design community at the end of the 20th century, in tune with many international institutions (these movements are described in the timeline in Chapter 2.3) were followed by other attempts to change the field and make its practice more sustainable environmentally and socially. In this context, the  material sourcing and production of goods are themes with serious political implications, as they are an essential part of the dynamics of material culture. Deforestation, intensive mining, unfair working conditions: these socio-economic phenomena are intrinsically connected to the decay of ecosystems. Designers and researchers have been exploring critically the theme of materiality:

> “Materials play a key role in the configuration of our environment and our life. Indoors, outdoors, even interstellar they allow us to thrive, providing us with comfort, function, beauty, and the many other qualities that nurture and enrich our lives. Materials can be visible or invisibly interwoven within our realities. They can be close to our skin or become part of what we breathe. They can be healthy or make us unhappy and sick.” (Sastre, 2021, p. 10)

Clara Guasch Sastre, Spanish lecturer in Sustainability, Materials and Innovation, writes about the information and power contained in the analysis of materials in the MaDe- Material Designers publication (2021). The project, who this author had the opportunity to take part as a material designer in the 2nd Milan Workshop in January of 2021, had as an objective train and foment designers who can transform and create matter for more sustainable production systems. As Sastre states, materials contain, through their composition and processing, a kind of _memory_ of our human interactions with Nature through material culture. [Materials hold, therefore, the possibility of acknowledging the past and inquiring on the future]{.highlight}.

That being the case, the relevance of materials in the nexus between design, politics and Nature is central, making it a worthwhile topic to explore in our quest to propose design strategies to start getting out of the crisis. Three concepts that I consider adequate to guide us through an overview on how the material lenses allow us to look at design and its futuring efforts are the concepts of _reduction_, _circularity_ and _regeneration_. In the next subchapters we are going to briefly go through this author’s views and considerations of each approach, their epistemological context and discuss their implications on a systemic political view.

#### 2.4.2 The reduction concept

The search for _more sustainable_ materials and processes was an important starting point for design to open up a debate. This moment in design history is well explained by Ceschin and Gaziulusoy (2020):

> “In the first half of the 1990s, the emphasis was on improving the individual qualities of individual products. In other words, the design scope was essentially limited to the materials and components of a product. In the second half of the 1990s, recognising the limitations of green design, the focus broadened to address the entire life cycle of products, ranging from the extraction of resources to end- of- life. This is usually referred to as product eco-design, and it represents an evolution of green design. Its main advantage over green design is that it systematically tackles all the technical aspects of a product life cycle. Product eco-design is now considered to be a very consolidated approach in terms of both theoretical knowledge and practical know- how.” (Ceschin and Gaziulusoy, 2020, p. 150) 

Even though the dematerialisation of products has grown in the last decades making artifacts often unnecessary for experiencing a service, we have not reached a point in which it can be unconsidered (will we ever?). Therefore, strategies to deal with the theme of materiality and production processes in a conscious and responsible way are still a relevant milestone.

It is what Italian researchers and professors Ezio Mazini and Carlo Vezzoli call _Environmental redesign of existing systems_, described in their influential publication _Design for Environmental Sustainability_ as “considering the life cycle of the examined product, it attempts to improve global efficiency with the selection of low impact materials and energy sources.” (2008, p. xi) This strategy can be used by product designers who, despite the rise of the digital, continued to have an industrial role. 

In their book, the authors offer many different tools and approaches for the development of sustainable products, making the document an important technical and operative contribution to the field. It brings forward concepts such as the Life Cycle Assessment, the selection of low environmental impact resources, the optimization of product life span, the extension of the life of materials, and the design for disassembly, for example - all frameworks that were not frequently seen in the field before. These tools and thoughts have not remained in the past and are still useful in many industrial realities that exist today. They may not seem a disruptive expression of complex and deep sustainability, but they initiate an important process of introduction of the theme in the industry.

_Reduction_ materials and processes are improved versions of existing ones, hence that are more easily implemented in existing production systems. There is a vast range of material strategies that support this trend such as the partial recyclability of matter; to more systemic approaches such as the optimisation of operations. For example, they may present reduced impact on energy or water usage and carbon footprint, or even be supported by the carbon credits market.

The broader implication of _reduction or eco-efficiency_ impacts both in the short term and longer term, working slowly shifting and adapting what we know. Its adaptive character does not imply it is not effective nor powerful. Instead, _reduction_ strategies are an appealing starting point to remodeling production. It is though, at this stage of ecological collapse, not enough to settle with _harming less_. For both Nature and fragile communities, we may start by reducing, but we must aim higher to a more complex shift of mindset and behavior on economic dynamics.

#### 2.4.3 The circularity concept

Circular materials and processes target the creation of a virtuous system in which the concept of waste does not exist. Matter is transformed but never discarded, becoming [endlessly a resource to a new process of production or nurturing of the land through composability]{.highlight}. Differently from _reduction_, this paradigm is less compatible with current mainstream economic dynamics and would need support of very different or new procedures. Even if _circularity_ is one of the most relevant terminologies when speaking about materials today, it is not a new idea.

Since the 1990’s, _eco design_ and the _reduction_ paradigm have slowly evolved into the pursuit of a circular economy, a direction that reframes the traditional take-make-waste economics logic into a cyclical and renewable perspective. Though its origins are not traceable to an exact date, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, one of the main diffusors of the circular economy concept, defends it started to take a clearer shape with the work by a small number of academics, [thought-leaders and businesses in the 1970’s\[61\]]{.footnote .footnote61}.  They argued that the linear production process (that was the norm) could not sustain humans on this planet much longer, and should be transformed into a circular economic perspective. This means that all the material that is taken from the Earth shall last as long as possible, and when it cannot be used anymore, it shall be gracefully degraded or recycled into the production system. 

This approach shares the philosophy of the “Cradle to cradle” strategy, that names the important book by Braungart and McDonough (2002), in which waste becomes a resource for new processes - the opposite of “Cradle-to-grave”, a linear alternative. This would not mean necessarily discovering ways of recycling what has already been produced, but re-thinking properties of materials themselves to function in this new logics:

> “Just because a material is recycled does not automatically make it ecologically benign, especially if it was not designed specifically for recycling. Blindly adopting superficial environmental approaches without fully understanding their effects can be no better- and perhaps even worse than doing nothing.” (McDonough, W., & Braungart, M., 2002, p. 59)

As materials are part of a large intricate system of interactions, such shifts would not only impact production processes in themselves, but the whole socio-political environment around them. Once sourcing (from waste) becomes local and diversified, experts expect it to also become more democratic and creative, opening up agency and decision power to other stakeholders who are today considered only consumers. As states Sastre:

> “All material waste streams could become visible and valuable. They carry on their value at every stage. Cities should learn to use the collective waste value (material and monetary) for restorative urban designs. Democratic material design thrives in open source yet is industrially scalable. It becomes a cultural choice to produce at different scales: domestically (home), locally (community) or industrially (territory).” (Sastre, 2021, p. 13)

Even though the applications of circular economy usually deal with materials and products, its scope definitely expands to the realm of services and political decisions. It is about the _what_ and _when_, but also about the _how_. It encompasses the fostering of slower and more conscious life-styles that go against how we have produced, consumed and viewed Nature (as an ever-giver of resources and ever-receiver of our waste) in the last centuries. 

Despite the powerful philosophical and practical implications of the circular model, is it enough to revert all the damage already done? Can materials go beyond circularity in the redesign of our economic systems?

#### 2.4.3 The regeneration concept

What if man-made objects (from the smallest to the largest) were not only harmless to the environment, but actually contributed positively to its ecosystems? This is the idea behind _regenerative_ materials. I like to compare this concept to what Braungart and McDonough described as an “eco-effective approach”, that, in contrast an “eco-efficient approach” of _reduction_, creates a large system of interconnected activities that support a biodiverse life. It is only natural that to explain this concept, they draw from the life of a cherry tree:

> “As it grows, it seeks its own regenerative abundance. But this process is not single-purpose. In fact, the tree's growth sets in motion a number of positive effects. It provides food for animals, insects, and microorganisms. It enriches the ecosystem, sequestering carbon, producing oxygen, cleaning air and water, and creating and stabilizing soil. Among its roots and branches and on its leaves, it harbors a diverse array of flora and fauna, all of which depend on it and on one another for the functions and flows that support life. And when the tree dies, it returns to the soil, releasing, as it decomposes, minerals that will fuel healthy new growth in the same place. The tree is not an isolated entity cut off from the systems around it: it is inextricably and productively engaged with them. This is a key difference between the growth of industrial systems as they now stand and the growth of nature.” (McDonough, W., & Braungart, M., 2002, p. 79)

As the authors declare, designers who pursue what they call _“eco-effectiveness”_ must expand their vision from the product and its particular production and consider the whole systems of players around it and its effect along the passing of time. _What are its goals and potential effects, both immediate and wide-ranging, with respect to both time and place? What is the entire system - cultural, commercial, ecological - of which this made thing, and way of making things, will be a part?_ (p.81) This approach that I am calling [_regeneration_]{.highlight} is about pushing a redesign of socio-economic systems towards symbiotic production through decision-making around materiality. 

The application of _regenerative thinking_ in the design of products is not a new thing and neither was invented by the authors cited, nor myself. Actually, the most sophisticated and interesting examples of this approach can be found in communities who have applied such concepts for centuries. Examples are abundant and a collection of them can be found in the valuable investigation organized by  Brazilian designer Andrea Bandoni in her book _“Objetos da Floresta”_ (2013) (Objects of the Forest, in Portuguese). The project mapped the creative use of natural materials by people in the Amazon region, who, with deep knowledge of local fauna and flora create objects with minimal to zero environmental impact. Those can be graters made from a dead fish tongue (p. 41),  bags from woven leaves (p. 63) or textiles designed from bark (p. 89).

If we search for examples on a larger and more complex scale, the use of living roots to build bridges by the Khasis people in India or the _apete_ villages built by the Kayapò people of the Amazon show us how communities can design their lifestyle and built environment in symbiosis with local Nature. These and other regenerative technologies are documented in the book “Lo-Tek - Design by Radical Indigenism” (2019) by Australian researcher and architect Julia Watson. Lo-TEK stands for Local Traditional Ecological Knowledge and proposes through their studies _“a design movement to rebuild an understanding of indigenous philosophy and vernacular architecture that generates climate-resilient infrastructures"_. (Watson, 2019, p. 9) 

The case studies outlines are not only circular. By utilizing natural materials and processes to support human life, they shift the sense of the word “production” from a man-made transformation (be it industrial or artisanal), to a predominantly natural process. _Production_ is, in these cases, the growth of plants and animals managed and guided by human will. This allows _production_ to be (in most cases) circular, carbon negative, ethical and beneficial to many beings, including humans.

There are many (if not all) aspects of this kind of _production_ that do not match our time and culture, both from the producers perspective and from the consumers. It is slow, many times unpredictable and hard to standardize - the complete opposite from the pillars of modern industries. So how could we use the positive aspects of regenerative production thinking today, in highly industrialized and even urban environments?

The recent efforts in the field of bio design is one example that can provide us inspiration for a gradual integration of the regenerative concept to our current economy. Defined by William Myers as a practice that integrates natural processes in production (2012, p. 10), bio design is a highly cross-sectorial activity that may involve designers, scientists, biologists and artists. It invites explorations on synthetic biology for the production of goods and services in which natural processes are the force transforming matter. From bio design ventures we have seen textiles made from bacteria, bricks made from recycled agricultural waste and mycelium, or carbon eating facades embedded with algae for architecture. These processes that started very experimental, are now slowly reaching the market with brands such as [Mogu\[62\]]{.footnote .footnote62} for mycelium-based architecture products or [PILI\[63\]]{.footnote .footnote63} for microbial pigments for textiles, polymers, paints and coatings.

However, we cannot pretend that this is a definite solution and that it ends there. As Myers writes himself, _the integration of life into design is not a magic bullet to solve these pressing issues_ (p. 10), and _simply using living systems to accelerate economic growth can lead to disaster_. (p. 17) Though regenerative materials can aid in the shift of production methods and also foster a new perception of natural processes as allies for our economy, it won’t shift industrial culture alone. As Braungart and McDonough remind us in Cradle-to-cradle (p. 91) _we need to shift “the design brief of economics”_. It’s about the pursuit of the beautiful concept of regeneration not only as a method of production of materiality but as a concept to guide our attitude towards our whole economic and political system.

[How might we design politics of Nature in which materiality is an ally in the pursuit of symbiotic economic systems?]{.highlight}

### 2.5 How does it impact governance: opening access to political power

Besides the relevant connection between design and politics through design's ontological character, there is an angle in which this practice deals directly with the creation, questioning and re-shaping of politics. How laws are made and maintained are an important subject that may not have historically involved the design field but are now a fertile field of reflection and action. To structure this discussion I find support in the work of researcher Carl DiSalvo (2010) and his differentiation of “design for politics” and “political design” as two different approaches that connect design and politics directly.

By looking critically into the growing field of “design for democracy”, the author identified a tendency to comply and improve the current cultures of policy building, while seeking to amplify consent among stakeholders. While involving lay people in political processes is important, it’s important that design doesn’t focus solely on improving user experience and oversee the problems that lie under the bureaucratic layer. He proposes that this kind of operation should be balanced with opportunities for questioning and defying (bureaucratic or cultural) rules that organize society by fostering “agonistic pluralism”, an approach to democracy that values conflict and contest. (p. 02) Aware of both of these approaches, “design for democracy” can be less reliant on hegemonic visions of inclusive politics, and open a fruitful space for adapting or dissolving social pacts. 

As both approaches are relevant to improving current politics of Nature, we can discuss the direct impact of design in the realm of politics by looking into the two of them.

#### 2.5.1 The improvement of political processes

Dori Tunstall explores the theoretical and practical possibilities of the intersection between design, policy, and governance in her work _In design we trust: design, governmentality, and the tangibility of governance_ (2007). She argues that design as a governmental strategy (or something she calls _N_ational Design Policy_) could be performed in four ways: (1) policy as designed, or the improvement of collective policy building through artifacts, communications, and experiences that compel, include, and enable lay citizens to design policy themselves through design practices;  (2) innovation policy; (3) design promotion through a new approach on innovation that makes tangible, real, and improvisational practices of government possible through design; and (4) design standards, or the selection of criteria for policy building by design processes, _“not describing a process of mechanical standardization, but rather the provision of guidelines and design models that are accessible to a wide range of constituents, avoid harming people, protect and sustain the environment, and stir the soul with their technical and aesthetic essence.”_  (Tunstall, 2007, p. 12).

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme17.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 17. Extracted from TUNSTALL, Elisabeth (Dori), 2007, p. 05"
---
::

In Scheme 17 we can see how Tunstall suggests the many touch-points of these contexts, clarifying their practical application. She links sustainability, for example, to Design Standards, suggesting that politics of Nature should go through a collective process of positioning Nature in the local value system to enroll the most adequate and promising policing. Adequacy is due one of her main arguments in the text, in which she affirms a National Design Policy could greatly improve trust in governments as citizens should rightly (as they are in fact co-builders of policies) trust the authorities.

Her work on outlining the applicability of design in different sectors of governance and pointing out the potential of intrinsic characteristics of the field on these missions presents possibilities to expand the design culture from product/service-based practice looking for revolution from the bottom to an intersection of bottom-up and top-down strategies that can renovate design itself. She summarizes three main opportunities for these worlds to merge: 

1. _Policy is designed and thus open to designing by people_. All policies are man-made with an objective in a _conscious action to impose meaningful order_ (design definition by Papanek). Therefore, who imposes this order is the designer of many peoples' conducts and destinies. It should be a collective process, and this can be aided by design approaches. 

2. _National design policies (formal or informal) should support the role of design in public sector governance_. Design should not only be about products and services in the market, and this amplification in design’s area of influence should be supported by the public sector. 

3. _When design functions as a way of making governance tangible to everyday people, it makes governance open to the participatory redesigns by those people_. The design process can have new meanings. There are many design practices that are now approachable to non-designers and that can be helpful in the construction of collectively created alternatives, for example the tools provided by Ideo on design thinking. These can and should be applied not only by companies but by the State, in the process of policy making to allow participation. 

Tunstall herself has been increasingly focused on defending a more independent and direct approach to [political design\[64\]]{.footnote .footnote64}, in which institutions and their bureaucratic structure may represent something more like obstacles than [opportunities\[65\]]{.footnote .footnote65}. A rich reasoning around designing for accessible government should consider the challenges of working within systems coined by oppressive reasoning. However, I believe her contribution in describing touch-points and potentially powerful connections between people, government and design is valuable in our quest to gain a wide comprehension on the theme. 

#### 2.5.2 Design in service of direct political action

There are situations in which improving bureaucratic processes is simply not enough. If we consider, for example, the experience of COP21 and the claims from activists who felt powerless and disrespected, it becomes clear that there is powerful political will from many private and public organizations to keep marginalized individuals and groups from deciding on their ways of living or taking part on building common politics of Nature. In this sense, there is also a need for us to understand how design can support political movements of radical reframe or dissolution of current logics of political power. In the following paragraphs two main topics emerge: design for direct political action and the reframing of the political, two visions that use design to question bureaucratic processes of policy building.

Direct political action is also a relevant theme for design dealing with politics of Nature. Be it through communication, strategy building or spatial organization, design disciplines can serve social movements through individual or collective work. Designer and researcher Tom Bieling explores this theme, focusing on the intersections of the discipline with activism (2020). Though he analyzes this intersection in a wider angle, considering research practices that foment both social action and political agency (2020, p. 05), to fulfill the scope of this work, we will look with deeper attention at his studies on design practices that relate directly to the social sphere. 

Bieling outlines at least three design fields that are relevant points of intersection between both worlds: [Design Activism\[66\]]{.footnote .footnote66}; [Participatory Design\[67\]]{.footnote .footnote67} and [Design Infrastructuring\[68\]]{.footnote .footnote68}. The first connects design precisely with the concept of activism, a practice that can be described as _“taking actions to catalyze, encourage or bring about change, in order to elicit social, cultural and/or political transformations”_ (Fuad-Luke, 2009, p. 06). In this process, the designer's tools and abilities are used to provoke shifts in the realm of the political, possibly in subjective (through culture) or very objective realities (laws and their manifestations). This kind of praxis is socially conscious and searches for a more balanced _“positive social, institutional, environmental and/or economic change”_.  (Fuad-Luke, 2009, p. 27). Though it carries a clear purpose, this approach is, however, more open about the course of action, encouraging an interpretation of the circumstances for choosing the most adequate performance. 

Participatory Design, on a more methodological note, aspires to the breaking of hierarchy in the design process. (Bieling, 2020, p. 09) The author explains that in this approach, designers and “non-designers” should have equal power. There is an emphasis on acknowledging and considering a wide range of stakeholders (entities involved directly or indirectly with the project), as an attempt to make the results more democratic. Finally, with a more systemic sense to participation, Design Infrastructuring proposes these same concepts in an amplified scale, having as a goal the creation of virtuous operations that [re-shape societal political structures]{.highlight} in the long-term. 

Bieling provides examples on practices in which design matches direct social action may look like, ranging from sensitive graphics to objects created for specific marginalized communities to new communitarian systems. Though there are well studied and tested praxis in these fields of study, discussing the many methods  and their potential flaws is outside the scope of this work. Due relevant observations to infer after the path of knowledge traced so far are: (1) once design intends to serve directly social movements, all three concepts presented by Bieling are important and represent stronger potential when connected: a design process that serves social movements breaking hierarchical structures, with a clear political goal and a long-term vision of change; (2) and even though we are focusing our discussion on the designer and the role of our praxis in these processes, it is imperative to remember that this is not about us and our intrinsic goals (as designers). It should be about who and what we are serving. Not only because it might be ethically correct (this discussion would require much debate), but because [if design is the fruit of the defuturing system, we are not the ones to have the answer on how to break it.]{.highlight} 

#### 2.5.3 The politics of everyday

The concept that politics is only what intermediates people and governance has been long debunked in this work. It is by now clear that design can influence politics  through the shaping of communication, objects and processes.  This notion is vital not only to have a new perspective on our work as designers, but also the other way around: realizing that politics is diffused all around us. 

Understanding this as an opportunity to expand political power is essential for Tony Fry. His book _Design as politics_ (2011) describes why and how design can play an essential role in such a process of awareness. He argues that design practices and their everyday shaping capabilities can transform our worldly experiences into small [political actions that]{.highlight}, when summed, can entail major changes. In addition, he argues that a political everyday could distribute power. He states:  

> Essentially, living politically (which makes everyday life a continual series of political acts) takes power away from existing institutional politics as it upholds the status quo. The spell of centralized power is broken and the reality of dispersed power is animated in action, and so made visible. Obviously, the act of remaking is not going to be embraced by all but is not unrealistic to envisage the formation of a critical mass of sufficient agency to make a major difference. (Fry, 2011, p. 103)

As a last contribution to this section of explorations on the role of design in politics of Nature, Fry incites our creativity. How can the many little activities contribute to a strongly political vision? Such as in Nature, the connected power of small political actions, when designed consciously, can create a chain of change. 

[How might we design politics of Nature that are accessible and clear to all, through a long-term, strong, and nurturing connection between design, beings and political power?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature by serving communities in their political visions, consciously decentering the designer3?]{.highlight}

### 2.6 Which vision does it feed: nurturing collective visions

#### 2.6.1 The power of envisioning together

Finally, one last aspect of design should be discussed to allow an extensive review: its ability to visualize alternative realities. Through prototypes or visual operations, designers are able to test and make visible things and ways of doing that still are not. As defends Forlano (2016), still in regard to the human-non human assemblages, _“experiments, prototypes, and demonstrations in hybridity and liminality that defy existing categories can serve to showcase productive collaborations between human and non human actors that will shape hopeful, alternative possible human futures.”_ (p. 54). This kind of operation serves as a critical tool, helping speculate, and hopefully clarify implications of economic, political, or even aesthetical choices. 

> Dreams are powerful. They are repositories of our desire. They animate the entertainment industry and drive consumption. They can blind people to reality and provide cover for political horror. But they can also inspire us to imagine that things could be radically different than they are today, and then believe we can progress toward that imaginary world. (Duncombe, 2007 as cited in Dunne & Raby, 2013, p. 01) 

With this opening quote, Fiona Raby and Anthony Dunne (2013) present the main concepts of speculative design: an approach that opens a space for creativity to wonder about what can happen. It is not about predicting the future, they affirm, but rather a set of activities that can help us better understand contemporary narratives and imagine a future that is wanted, or rather not wanted at all. Using designers' abilities to transform concepts in objects and pictures, [the operations consist in making a vision that is individual or collective into powerful objects upon which a larger public can discuss]{.highlight}.

Using a similar discourse of speculative visions, other groups are developing different approaches: design anthropologists, for example, use visioning as a tool for collective processes of design. In the design anthropological perspective _“futures are not understood as striking visions created and implemented by scientists or designers, but rather as collaborative explorations of situated possibilities, formations and actions at the intersections of design and everyday life”_ (Smith et al., 2016, p. 01). By engaging plural perspectives to future building, these researchers are going against a future constructed in [singularity\[69\]]{.footnote .footnote69} combining lines of action common to the design field (most commonly focused on elaborating future solutions) and the realm of anthropology (usually dedicated to understanding the past and the present realities). Through this work,

> historicity becomes a key to reconfiguring futuring, everyday serves as a lab for experimentation, intervention becomes a path of speculative inquiry and the environment emerges as a philosophical agent. In other cases, cultural imaginaries are challenged by fictions and prototypes, design objects are used to enter conversation dispositifs , and non-humans actively raise new social questions. (Smith et al., 2016, p. 04)

The experiences by speculative designers and design anthropologists for visioning are highly valuable for designing politics of Nature as they provide cues on how to engage the broader public into local and adequate policy building on complex subjects such as environmental strategies. They can help clarify what are the current narratives for Nature in a specific group and what they could be. The many case studies and experimentations (that could not be further discussed within the limits of time of this work) may inspire and guide future projects on subjects of this kind and surely others involving relevant political movements. 

[How might we design politics of Nature that involve local (human and non-human) communities in the building of future visions?]{.highlight}


::PageFull{.full-align-center}
&nbsp;
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 3. Inferences on designs<br>for politics of Nature’s
::

Defining design, or what a designer does, is not an easy task and may constantly confuse professionals of this field. Ironically, this constant questioning might have been one of the factors that allowed the incredible expansion through reckless experimentation that gave birth to the “many designs” that we find today. Despite the almost aseptic soil in which design was planted (due to infinite constraints and subordination), design seems to have been able to sprout and spread, mutating and adapting, flowering unexpected colors. 

Design may not ever be defined, as it can be many things. What defines what design is, in my view, is the consequences it produces – and that changes (and should change!) every time it is done. We had the opportunity to look at what design _can be_ through the revision of the approaches that questioned that dangerous version that design many times assumes: the one that works towards disconnection, oppression, and overconsumption. 

In the analysis carried in Part B, we looked briefly into the roots design’s impact on  Nature and the history of movements that search for a more sustainable practice. Considering _how design is done_, _what is it made from_, _its impact on governance_ and _what visions does it feed_, we wove interesting topics and fields of study that amplify the more obvious notions of design for sustainability. From all the insights gathered, I choose to highlight the following six roles design can have as a positive activity for designing politics of Nature:

- (1)	connector of symbiotic individuals/groups;

- (2)	supporter for autonomous communities;

- (3)	conscious implementer of materiality and production techniques;

- (4)	contributor to political justice; and

- (5)	 nurturer of collective sustainable visions;

And the design activity can assume many fashions, among which I highlight: 

- a. supporting complex processes; 
- b. shaping ways of doing and living.
- c. enhancing communication; and
- d. materializing narratives and visions; 

::ImageFull{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492931/schemes/scheme18.svg
subtitle: "Scheme 18. Complete map of the thesis. In the central part the role of the designer was distilled from the 7 questions and the inner (lilac) ring with the possible attributions."
---
::


These insights gathered from the discussions on the part of this book can and should be amplified, criticized, and pondered by each individual or collective. For the sake of completing this work, I refrain from expanding these lists and hope they are enough to feed first thoughts. For now.

It would be naive and irresponsible to expect one field of work (design) to be able to resolve centuries of application of the myths of separation and oppression. However, as an optimist, I believe we can contribute greatly. There is no magic potion or easy recipe, in this case. I believe reviewing, criticizing, and reshaping our day-to-day approach has so much potential for change in the long run.
