---
title: 'Preface - Systemic sustainability  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
order: 2
navigation:
  title: 'Preface'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492938/css/style-green.css">

### Design and <br>serious times

This book confronts the relationships between design and sustainability beyond linear visions, inserting the theme in a systemic perspective, with the urgency and passion of the young designer. The text was originally presented as a thesis for Design at the Faculty of Architecture and Urbanism of the University of São Paulo, in the year 2021.

The distinctive attribute of this book is the multiplicity of knowledge realms manipulated by the author, what I consider to be a primordial requirement to situate design within the scope of politics for nature. The wealth of references, diagrams, and contemporary literature added to the author’s transformative utopias leads us to navigate important theoretical contributions synthesized in her work. It is also relevant to highlight that the protagonism of design is absolutely fundamental in facing the socio-environmental issues of our time, and this book brings concise considerations that are elegantly exposed in this publication.

Strongly inspired by the seminal work of Arturo Escobar, Bruno Latour and Tony Fry, Clara leads us to reflect on our inability to deal with the relationship between humanity and nature, but also on the consequences and what will come after: chaos, catastrophes, emergencies, war.

In each of the chapters, organized in the 3 parts of this book, the author discusses the names and definitions that we have had for a long of _Nature and development_ through the lenses of the _political_ and _design_. She untangles the reasons why we have immense difficulties in overcoming the complexity of current environmental impasses and alerts us to their terrible and inequitable consequences. We are in a period of profound crisis of a kind we have not experienced in decades. Clara reminds us that Design can have a role.

Perhaps a surprise effect, loaded with possibilities in the visions for design is presented in part C, the latest, illuminated by the many efforts of younger generations of our field (like the author herself) who are confronting our collective challenges with creativity and resilience.

I enthusiastically recommend reading _Systemic sustainability: weaving design, politics, and Nature_ and thank the author for the exchange of ideas, comments, and endless hours of conversations, especially through the Milanese winter of 2020, in the laboratory of my dear colleague Stefano Maffei.

Brava Clara!

::ImageSignature
---
src: /9786599492938/images/maria-cecilia-lochiavo.jpg
---
_Maria Cecilia Loschiavo dos Santos_<br> _Full Professor at University of São Paulo and Scholar CNPq_
::

::PageFull
&nbsp;
::

### Introduction to the first edition

What does the spider, the weaver and the researcher have in common? Well, obviously everything.

One of the greatest joys in life, at least for me, is making connections. Finding that transparent thread that links one thing to another, learning how this association works and then, eventually, making the knots yourself. This work is a woven piece, the result of theoretical explorations connecting the concepts of design and Nature through the realm of the political, using multiple threads (references) and a tridimensional loom (structure).

When the text that follows was crafted, there was no intention or expectation of it ever becoming a published book. It was, in fact, my thesis, an exercise to consolidate what I have learned in my years at university. As such, its main objective was to map and connect relevant concepts for the themes that I considered of utmost relevance and that would quick off my professional journey as a designer. Those themes should be relevant and enlighten my practice on a personal and collective level.

Through the layers, intertwined, the reader can find thoughts, quotes, definitions, and many, many questions. I hope to honour those who taught me (many of whom are referenced in my text) and inspire those who read. And above all, open a conversation, after all, we have a lot of work to do and I hope this is just a beginning.

_Clara Bartholomeu_
