---
title: 'Part A - Systemic sustainability  - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
order: 4
navigation:
  title: 'Part A'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492938/css/style-red.css">

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# Part A
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 1. Names and <br>definitions
::

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme5.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: Scheme 5. Represents the crisis and three of its facets, socio-economic, political and environmental. By the author.
---
::

### 1.1 Meeting point!

_The crisis ahead of the Earth community is one of political, socioeconomic, and ecological nature_. _Not just political, or socioeconomic, or ecological, but all three, deeply connected and indissociable_. This statement (made in the introduction) is clear, but its fundamental reasons are still to be clarified. What does the socioeconomic crisis have to do with the environment? How do politics interact with all these other systems? Through the analysis of the historical and contemporary concepts of Nature and economic development, we will start exploring the underlying framework that connects these worlds.

### 1.2 Defining Politics of Nature

[Ecology]{.highlight} is defined by Oxford Dictionary as “the branch of biology that deals with the relations of organisms to one another and to their physical surroundings” and is oftentimes regarded as separate from other branches of [political\[10\]]{.footnote .footnote10 .highlight}  discussions. Instead, what is called [economy\[11\]]{.footnote .footnote11 .highlight} or the flow of productive activities is, today, a central concern of politics, while the environmental impact of these economic activities remain referred to as “externalities”, raising a symbolic boundary between Nature and the realm of human influence (Raworth, 2017, p. 269). However, the same economy is the predominant exercise that extracts, transforms, and exchanges [natural beings\[12\]]{.footnote .footnote12 .highlight} globally, establishing a complex system that supports people’s life on Earth while Nature is, for most, a provider of human resources (food, materials or clean air) or enjoyment (through tourism or animal spectacles, for example). Therefore, the division between politics, Nature, and economy is not only reductive, but counterproductive to the efforts of comprehending how to work inside this network. [The decisions that concern if and how humans will collectively interact with Nature (phenomena that today is predominantly economic) is certainly political, and this is how this work defines Politics of Nature]{.highlight}.

### 1.3 The many names of Nature

But what is Nature? One might say Nature [_is what connects all beings on the Earth_\[13\]]{.footnote .footnote13}  as we all have some kind of Nature around us – trees, rocks, insects, water – wherever we are. However, it is noticeable that Nature has many names. The importance and characteristics attributed to Nature by an individual or community can be analyzed by the name it is given, in other words, by the [_narrative_]{.highlight} it inhabits. _Natural assets_, _Mother Nature_, _environment_, _forest_, and _Natural Capital_ are some of the names that different groups apply to non-human natural beings that imply different attitudes in the [human-nature relationship\[14\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote14}.  And this has, needless to say, strong political implications. 

Researchers Raymond et al. (2013) discuss some of the denominations given to Nature and their practical outcomes due to semiotic implications and divide these names into what they call [_metaphors_]{.highlight} and [_approaches_]{.highlight}. While _metaphors_ are applied to complex concepts with the aim of enabling communication between stakeholders, _approaches_ are methods for undertaking actions (they also notice that approaches may be rooted in metaphors). 

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/tables/table1.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/tables/table1-d.svg
subtitle: Table 1. Extracted from Raymond et al. 2013, p. 539, this table explains some common metaphors for Nature. It explicits how the narrative behind these metaphors has practical implications.
---
::

The authors study five metaphors applied in environmental politics and its strengths and weaknesses in regard to communicating, understanding, and managing human– environment interactions. They not only provide a description of the objective, ethics, and indicators of success in each metaphor but also a graphic visualization that helps understanding the character of the relationship enticed by it. [This study demonstrates clearly that narratives that describe the human-nature relationship have practical political implications]{.highlight}. 

The authors acknowledge that in their studies these metaphors were crystallized in their main insights for clarity's sake and that, in their application in the real world, they are rarely seen in such _pure form_, often being complemented with elements of other metaphors. Nevertheless, the authors advocate for politics of Nature that are inclusive to more than one metaphor, as these represent more than practical approaches but also worldviews. They underline that unilateral views of human – environment exchange, such as the economic production metaphor – can be useful for specific cases, while completely inappropriate for others, and healthy policing should be able to manage these narratives in a comprehensive fashion. 

The power of narratives is not unknown, but to environmental political studies it suddenly becomes patent to understand it. Nature has been given many names throughout history and there are dominating metaphors and their unleashed approaches that have built up the current _state of things_. Those must and will be analyzed in the next chapters of this work. 

### 1.4 Inferences on politics of Nature 

Politics and Nature are not only connected through what is commonly known as “environmental politics”, but through all economic activity. In fact, the vision of separation of Nature from other sectors of the economy has proven to be of great disservice, perpetuating the impression that our system is composed of disconnected forces. Thus, this work will not only focus, as one might think, on what is known as “environmental politics” but on how Nature has been affected by many politics of socioeconomic kind.

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# 2. Nature and development
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
_Curiously, for people so obsessed with history, time passed in vain for the moderns. Bombarded with sciences and technologies, they never used these to become wiser, since they never managed to read in these events the meticulous exploration of their own collectives of humans and nonhumans. (Latour, 2018, p. 201)_
::

### 2.1 Meeting point!

Now that we have defined this work’s view on _politics of Nature_ and have seen how it is not just about “environmental politics” (as important as they are), we are going to explore the connections of the depletion of ecosystems and our current economic paradigms. In this part, we will see how praised concepts of development, growth and consumption, have participated in the current (many) crisis we are living in. 

### 2.2 The myth of development and abundance paradox

As the nexus between economics, politics, and Nature has been made clear, to start discussing the current state of politics of Nature, it is imperative to review two of the main principles that have truly guided economics: [_development_]{.highlight} and [_growth_]{.highlight}. These concepts, even if technically alluding to the description of cyclical natural processes that regard living beings, represent, on the economical lexicon, a process that is linear and limited (Lang, 2016). Ironically, against its original meaning, both concepts have been used to defend processes of devastation of natural environments and Nature’s wellbeing throughout history, since the colonizing voyages of Columbus, then again in the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century, to the contemporary conditions of globalized neoliberalism (Moore, 2017). 

The term _development_, now widely applied to economics, as explained by Mexican activist Gustavo Esteva (2009), was first used in the field of biological studies to name _“a process through which the potentialities of an object or organism are released, until it reaches its natural, complete, full-fledged form”_. From the work of German philosopher Christian Wolff (1759) and the English biologist Charles Darwin (1859) _development_ evolved into a conception of _appropriateness_. It was then used to differentiate standard individuals (those who presented the expected responses to the effects of time) than those assumed “defective” (those who did not present the expected results). The use of this metaphor in the social sphere occurred only in the last quarter of the 18th century, when Justus Möser, the German conservative founder of social history, used the word _Entwicklung_ (development, in German) to allude to the gradual process of social change (Esteva, 2009, as cited in Gudynas, 2019, p. 4). 

Today, in the semantics of development and growth reside the logics of expansion of economics. Many events and strategies followed and reinforced this logic, being one noted example of the political and cultural power established by the United States of America after World War II. Their beliefs in mass production and consumerism to deliver prosperity resonated with this ideology, and, as Esteva (2009) argues, the application of development to discourse was a powerful tool to consolidate their hegemony.

Esteva also explains that the first significant use of the term development in the sense that we understand today was in 1949, and it is attributed to the American president, Harry Truman, who, searching to distinguish their lifestyle from others, described non-industrialized nations as “underdeveloped”. As written by French economist Geneviève Azam (2019), by this opposing comparison, Truman established for the whole second half of the 20th century (and for many, it still is), development and growth as the ideal standard for a flourishing economy, either in a socialist or a capitalist organization. This discourse is rooted in a singular and exclusive vision of what prosperity means, which is based in industrialization, social relations mediated by capital, and lifestyles supported by the consumption of goods. 

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme6.svg
subtitle: Scheme 6. On the abundance paradox and its working forces. By the author.
---
::

Justified by the need to collectively aid the [Global South\[15\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote15} international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank were created. Through them, the dream of development through economic growth that had been applied in Europe and North America was then exported to the non-industrialized countries. Colombian anthropologist Arturo Escobar (2019) criticizes the role that the World Bank has had since its conception in 1944, as what followed was the further destruction of physical and philosophical environments of the nations peripheral to the global economy: communities from Asia, South America, and Africa have been once again colonized by the West. The World Bank itself, the author states, is one of the most relevant mechanisms of induced development in [Third World Countries\[16\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote16} (Escobar, 2019, p. 278) and has acted on behalf of transforming non-[Western\[17\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote17}  countries into productive sites of primary goods through fund lending and gross investments connected to multinational companies.

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme7.svg
subtitle: Scheme 7. Scheme argues on the abundance paradox and its working forces. Extracted from World Bank, 2018, Changing the Wealth of Nations, a study on the economic development of 141 countries over 20 year.
---
::

The promise of development, though, has been proven to be deceptive for the communities of the Global South (Lang, 2016, p. 26) and turned out to install what the Equatorian economist Alberto Acosta (2018) refers to as the _abundance paradox_, or [the curse of natural resources\[18\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote18},  meaning the historically proven condition of harmful dependence that was established in southern regions that accepted the pact of producing by the rules of the central nations. The paradox consists in the fact that the richer they were in terms of natural assets and volume of untouched natural beings, the more extensively exploited and consequently poor in economic terms they came to be.

This happens because those industrialized economies, having destroyed their own natural feedstocks after centuries of evolution, need to find new sources to provide. Acosta argues that the establishment of [extractivism\[19\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote19} and [monocultures\[20\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote20}  that should serve the internal and external markets, instead of “healing the underdeveloped” from their financial fragilities, have had a great negative impact in their ecosocial structures and, inarguably, are part of the ecological crisis we live in today. Authorized and encouraged by local government authorities, corporations take Nature’s beings and carry them around the globe, interfering with the life of ecosystems, including, of course, human communities. It is worth noting that this intervention is very often wanted by the communities themselves, as they carry the promise of progress. But as argued, the costs are much higher and do not reach equity. 

[And the trap of development hurts in all parts (unevenly, as one profits much more and establishes economic, political, and cultural power over the others while assuring comfort for itself), as both are convinced that practices such as extractivism described before will result in, simply put, a better life. The curse is translated in this belief that discourages communities to imagine alternative economies and dream of different futures.]{.highlight}

In conclusion, the historical connection between development, growth, and Nature has been proven unbalanced, with the first two superimposing the third in the name of human wellbeing. Efforts are being made to change the way the Western-led international community perceives value, but the cultural change process shall be gradual and long lasting. One example is the Changing the Wealth of Nations program by the World Bank that aims at encouraging the substitution of the GDP measurement to a more comprehensive notion of Wealth that accounts for Natural Capital and Human Capital as well. Besides the problematic productivistic objectification of the terminology, it highlights the fact that the still prevalent modality of well-being is based on material possessions and power. This way of living suppresses alternative visions of past, present, and future realities as its growing needs for virgin materials and consumer markets is already pervasive in the global community, traveling through the so-called [Global Market\[21\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote21}.  The myth of development allows this Market to be the vehicle through which capitalism and all of its tools thrive, and is many times referred to as an unstoppable machine that, as we saw, runs over Nature and the many other cultures in order to acquire fuel.

### 2.3 How did we get here? From Sustainability to Sustainable Development to Green Economy.

The harmful character of development towards Nature was internationally recognized in the 20th century. It is usually attributed to the North American biologist Rachel Carson the first resonant stand against the deteriorating practices that were the base of human economy, inaugurating what can be called [The Age of Ecology\[22\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote22} (Sessions, 1987; Bhamra & Lofthouse, 2007). In her book _Silent Spring_ (1962), Carson denounces the dangers of the use of pesticides for the sake of wildlife and defends a more collaborative and respectful relationship between people and the rest of Nature. 

The thought around what constituted this new _age_ has changed over the decades, as science reached new conclusions and the population grew aware. In a study of relevant events on international environmental politics, we can observe such shifts, gaining a broader notion on what has and has not yet been done. It is important to note that the selection of events, though including smaller South American initiatives, is strongly based on the history of established institutions that carry the legitimacy of countries of the Global North. The timeline that follows draws from three main sources:

1. [Tracy Bhamra and Vicky Lofthouse]{.highlight .highlight-red} (2007), design professors from English Loughborough University that distill relevant marks on the history of sustainability up until 2002 in their publication Design for Sustainability: A practical approach;
2. [Eduardo Gudynas]{.highlight .highlight-blue} (2019), researcher on the Centro Latinoamericano de Ecología Social– CLAES (Latin American Center for Social Ecology) on his book The Rights of Nature that narrates critically the history of environmental politics and the ascendance of biocentric ethics;
3. [The International Institute for Sustainable Development]{.highlight .highlight-green} – IISD (2013), timeline of Sustainable Development; and
4. [This author’s]{.highlight .highlight-bege} numerous parallel researches and studies.  


:TimeLine

After a critical review of the timeline of sustainable development described above, we can infer that:

1. The fight for sustainability has been present in the past 60 years and the warnings on the dangers of our economic model have been clear for a long time. However, until this day, many people (including political leaders) deny the existence of climate change or overlook the importance of environmental politics. This highlights that there is no linear path to build new sustainable economic models and that just education is not enough, since the problem does not lie in unawareness but in unwillingness to change.

2. The narratives on sustainability performed by international institutions shifted throughout decades, ending up the most adequate to the neoliberal capitalist system we live in today. The international approach in the end of the 1970s and beginning of 1980s also included health and social justice. Over the next years, it was translated into _Sustainable Development_, or a _more sustainable way to maintain our economic system_. Until the second decade of the 2000s the mainstream international discussions revolved mostly around technical issues (e.g., Kyoto Protocol), and became more connected to the development of sustainable businesses (e.g., Dow Jones Sustainability Index). In this period the social side to sustainability was led by NGOs and social movements, showing that these entities are essential players in a systemic fight against [climate change]{.highlight} and [climate justice\[23\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote23}.  

3. Besides the inconsistency in the increased adoption of sustainable measures by many countries, since the 2010s the debate on climate change has become progressively popular outside the high rooms of decision-making debates.

4. Today, we live in a moment of highly polarized views of sustainability, in which worldwide student protests and social groups manifestations are contrasted with governments whose policing provides insufficient protection to Nature, often with the excuse to “protect the economy”. This highlights again that the discussion around environmental politics cannot be based only on information (there is enough for anyone to be convinced, if willing) and that it includes discussing other realms of politics, most of all, [economic strategies]{.highlight}.  

5. The strategies chosen in the pursuit of sustainability have been mainly decided in closed rooms filled by few, who have not been capable of advancing the remodeling of economic structures fast enough. Meanwhile, activists and the communities most directly affected by the systemic oppression of Nature, and who have contributed to the construction and diffusion of necessary systemic cultural shifts are, until today, left on the outskirts of decision making.

To support the arguments just presented, above all the last two points, it feels important to look more deeply into two relevant recent events that were briefly brought about in the timeline. Therefore, the next two chapters bring forward to the analysis the Sustainable Development Goals, set in 2015, and that have been guiding public policing and the goals of communication from private organizations; and the COP26 Summit, held in 2021, that was supposed to be a decisive event for orienting politics of Nature in the international level. 

### 2.4 Sustainable Development Goals 

One seemingly relevant advancement in Western transnational sustainability politics that amplified the narrow views of Green Economy paradigms is _The Sustainable Development Goals_ (SDGs), set at the beginning of 2015 by the United Nations Member States. They derive from the Millennium Development Goals and set an international agenda to eradicate poverty and shift the world onto a _sustainable development_ path by 2030. In the document, environmental problems are intrinsically connected to other [wicked problems\[24\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote24}. More specifically, the 17 SDGs include goals on poverty reduction, education, health, the environment, and peaceful and inclusive societies.

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/images/img3.png
subtitle: Image 3. Icons of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, adopted on 25 September 2015 as a part of the 2030 Agenda. Retrieved from sdgs.un.org/goals.
---
::

It is important to highlight what is understood by Sustainable Development, the main concept that names the strategies. Closer to a continuation than a rupture, this concept has been often attached to improvements (bigger or smaller) on current economic logics. It responds to the clear need of the system to adapt, for the consciousness that all people and Nature are entitled to healthy and happy living conditions, or for the knowledge of the market that people in stable socioeconomic conditions surrounded by a livable environment can consume more. These two motivations are not exclusive and have most likely influenced historically the events described in the timeline and the creation SDG’s themselves.

This discussion gives us base to understand strong critiques to the 2030 agenda that are worth pointing out: the scholars and authors of the _Post-Development Dictionary_ (Kothari et al., 2019, p. xxvii) insist that there is a strong incoherence in the document of the Agenda 2030, as it preaches for “sustainable economic growth” while it is clear to many by now that this would be not possible if the 17 missions are to be pursued. They declare it to be a “false consensus” and list latent flaws in this approach, such a continued emphasis in economic growth and globalization, subserviency to private capital and the incessant sidelining of culture, ethics, and spiritualism. (Kothari et al., 2019, p. xxvi) 

Furthermore, just the premise of pursuing development (even if it should be conditioned to a revolutionary prefix) is itself questionable, since we have seen the exclusive, North-centric, and anthropocentric mindset that sustains this concept. Highlighting these points, Ailton Krenak (2019) summarizes precisely the point: “Natural resources for whom? Sustainable development for what? _What do we need to sustain?_” (p. 16, our translation, highlight added by the author). If we are fighting to sustain this way of living, then we will forever be lost chasing our own tails.

The advancements in the SDGs 2020 Report are not very promising, as the document shows that climate change is still occurring much faster than anticipated and the temperature of the Earth keeps rising. Simultaneously the acidification of the ocean keeps accelerating, land degradation continues, massive numbers of species are at risk of extinction, and unsustainable consumption and production patterns remain pervasive. In the report’s foreword, the Secretary-General of the United Nations António Guterres pleads for “renewed ambition, mobilization, leadership and collective action” (United Nations, 2020, p. 02) as the international community still has a lot to conquer in order to achieve, even partially, some of the goals. 

The negative results in the report can be read as a (predictable) great resistance presented by our economic systems to re-shaping themselves. The flows and activities that have been set and working for the last decades are still part of our reality and it takes time and enormous efforts to change them. In addressing these wicked problems, the SDGs propose a complex group of goals and guidelines but do not force radical systemic change in political and economic agendas, remaining somewhat closer to _suggestions_ than _commitments_.

And why, in such urgent times, an organization such as the UN is not able to push the sustainable agenda with increased celerity and effectiveness? An interesting analysis that explains the historical objectives of the entities who lead processes such as the creation of the SDGs is provided by Krenak (2019):

> These agencies and institutions were configured and maintained as structures of this [Western concept of] humanity. And we legitimize their perpetuation, we accept their decisions, which are often bad and cause us losses, because they are at the service of the humanity we think we are. (p. 9, our translation and brackets)

As important as the SDGs are for amplifying and fomenting sustainable action, it is necessary to question where they come from and how they are implemented. It is clear that new promises without new logic will hardly bring effective results, this entails not only reshaping economic systems but also our political systems. As long as these decisions are made following our current economic paradigms, in peaceful agreement with the most environmentally impactful companies on an international scale, how can we expect to have results fast enough? There may not be one miraculous recipe, but the analysis of the timeline allows us to believe that if we don't pursue new economic paradigms that are detached from our traditional conceptions of development and growth, it will take too long (or forever) to start reducing the advancements of climate change, social inequality, and biodiversity loss.

[How might we design politics of Nature that enhance human life on Earth that don’t necessarily revolve around our current ideas of development and economic growth?]{.highlight}

### 2.5 COP 26

The most recent event that adds valuable content to our discussion in this book is the COP26. The yearly event is the official meeting of the UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), which is the branch of the UN who is [“tasked with supporting the global response to the threat of climate change”\[25\]]{.footnote .footnote25}.  They have parented the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 and the Paris Agreement in 2015, for example. 

And it was precisely the latter agreement, the protagonist of the 2021 Conference that took place in Glasgow, in the United Kingdom: the main objective was to revise and reinforce the settlement. As we have discussed before, recent reports (such as the already mentioned [UN SDGs 2020 Report\[26\]]{.footnote .footnote26}  or the [IPCC Climate Change report of 2021\[27\]]{.footnote .footnote27})  provide evidence of the inefficiency of the efforts made up until now to reduce, let alone reverse, the negative impacts of human action on Nature on a [global scale\[28\]]{.footnote .footnote28}.  Therefore, the need to pursue more ambitious commitments from the parties was publicized as the central matter of discussion.

Though it has been decided to keep the goal of 1.5 degrees Celsius of global heating foreseen in the Paris Agreement (which can be seen as a positive maintenance of a challenging task), it remains voluntary and fairly unclear as to [how this shall be achieved\[29\]]{.footnote .footnote29}.

And while big negotiations progressed inside the chambers of the event, on the outside the roar of activists was loud and clear. Things were being done, again, following old models of grand speeches and little effectiveness, and with [insufficient representativity and inclusivity\[30\]]{.footnote .footnote30}.  Even though indigenous representatives and environmental leaders were invited to speak at the Conference, their relevance in the fight for climate justice did not match the attention and decision power they were given. 

> Indigenous peoples came to Cop26 in Glasgow with clear goals that we wanted to see reflected in the final results. Now it is over, we don’t see the path forward we were hoping for. There is still too much wrangling between the developed and the developing countries, with the developed nations blocking much-needed agreements on rights and funding. And overall progress towards implementing the commitments made in the Paris Agreement is too slow. (Tauli-Corpuz, 2021)

Activist and director of Tebtebba Foundation (Indigenous Peoples’ International Centre for Policy Research and Education) in the Philippines, Victoria Tauli-Corpuz sees the results of the COP26 as insufficient. She recognizes in her article for The Guardian that there were important conquests for the indigenous movements, such as the inclusion of goals to “respect, promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples”. But she highlights where such large-scale politics tend to present fragilities: 

> When several countries and philanthropic donors committed $1.7bn to indigenous peoples to protect their forests, I voiced my hope that these resources would be effectively and directly accessed by indigenous peoples and not go through intermediaries such as states or the big conservation organizations. . .
> Article 6 on market and non-market-based mechanisms for mitigation mentions the need to respect indigenous peoples’ rights but does not mention the need to obtain our free, prior and informed consent. We hoped for an international grievance mechanism but that was downgraded. (Tauli-Corpuz, 2021)

Tauli-Corpuz evidences the difference between speech and effective action, not denying the importance of the first, but denouncing that without the second, nothing is done. Between a promise voiced in Glasgow and the necessary (monetary and political) power being delivered in the hands of indigenous activists to sustain their endless activities to protect Nature, there is a draining system composed of what we can call “bureaucracy”. Here this word is used to represent quite broadly the many mechanisms that dilute agency and financial support until their arrival to the final and intended beneficiary, as explicited by Tauli-Corpuz. Direct power is the only way today to provide effective support to these groups fast enough. 

This vision applies also to the structures of COP itself, as reminds Txai Suruí, Brazilian activist from the [Paiter-Suruí\[31\]]{.footnote .footnote31}  tribe invited by the country's delegation who spoke in the opening of the event. In an interview to journalist Bernardo Esteves (2021) from the magazine Revista Piauí, she makes clear that the spotlight is not enough:

> We don't only want to speak, we want to participate in the decision-making process. We have to decolonize all spaces, and this is done including indigenous people, black people, people from the quilombos, and from the favelas. . . . If they \[the white people in suits at COP\] are the only ones deciding for us, it is not going to work. (parentheses added by the author)

We have seen in the last chapters that it hasn't worked, and, as Txai Surui defends, it will not unless significant shifts are made in how these politics are built. 

### 2.6 Conclusions on the concepts of Nature and development

After an analysis that started with the “classic history of sustainability” based on renowned events or historical marks and arriving at recent events, it becomes clear the connection and influence of the paradigm of _development_ has had over Nature. As we have seen, the expression _Sustainable Development_ itself has been connected to one specific way of pursuing sustainability, which proposes technological solutions to complex environmental problems and corroborated with long standing ideals of economic growth. They are basically saying “let’s keep doing what we have been doing for centuries, let’s just find a less polluting way to do so.” There is no question on our need to find a way to _improve_ human life of many on Earth in a way that is _sustainable_, but the question relies on _how_ and for _whom_.

The historical shift in sustainable development from _broad sustainable politics_ to the _Green Economy_ that happened especially after the 1992 Earth Summit (Lowy, 2013) was seemingly an attempt to involve the many actors of the economic sector, especially the private sector, in the fight for an ecologically sustainable economy. [As noble as these intentions might have been, what we see is a resulting inverse effect: the idea of _sustainable development_ did not take the market, but the market took _sustainable development_ instead]{.highlight}. This process is explained by Azam (2019) as the rise of the _neoliberal protocol_, that, taking command of decision and action power that previously belonged to the State, profited from the already precarious politics regarding the protection of Nature and poor people. If the lead of Sustainable Development belongs to the global market or the Green Economy (in other terms, the “white men in suits” that Txai Surui mentioned in the COP26), how would it be possible to extinguish, or even hold back, capitalist logics of _development_ and _growth_ within this program?

It isn't. As Azam argues, the current within Sustainable Development of reducing the pressure on ecosystems by the appliance of [_sustainable technology_\[32\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote32} or “phasing down” deals without questioning the principles of growth and accumulation on a global scale, the likely result would be the substitutions of sources and increase of consumption, instead of its decay. If we truly want to shift our perspectives, the current paradigm of Sustainable Development is not going to be enough. Is it all lost then?

As we have examined in the previous chapter centered on the COP26 event, there are people who offer alternatives. With a broader view, they will propose a new way of looking into the economy and into politics of Nature, pointing out the need for climate justice. They are indigenous activists such as Txai Suruí and the Paiter-Suruí people, Davi Kopenawa and the [Yanomami people\[33\]]{.footnote .footnote33} or the quilombola people from [Quilombo Kalunga\[34\]]{.footnote .footnote34},  all from Brazil; the celebrated [Wangari Maathai\[35\]]{.footnote .footnote35}  from Kenya; communities led by people of color; marginalized groups; and activists all over the world who resist, demand and create alternative ways of pursuing an improved economy.

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/tables/table2.svg
subtitle: Table 2. Sustainability trends, extracted from Gudynas (2019), p. 254. 
---
::

To differentiate and refer to these disparate visions of a economic development that is sustainable, we can borrow the work from Gudynas that defines three different trends, represented in Table 2. Each one presents a “level of sustainability”, starting from “unincorporated” to “superstrong”, the latter being the one that presents [biocentric\[36\]]{.footnote .footnote36 .highlight}  ethics and questions the ideology of progress. These three concepts have always co-existed in environmental discussions but represent very different socio political world visions. 

As sustainability also becomes a field of power dispute, much knowledge (above all popular and indigenous knowledge) has been lost, erased or simply left at the borders, being referenced to when convenient. And not enough has been done. We notice by observing the events described in the timeline that mainstream, multilateral, North-led institutions initiatives of sustainability were forced into fitting current economic logics, which restrained their systemic and deeper nature. 

But why is it so difficult to change our patterns since we have been able to watch the catastrophe unfolding before our eyes over decades? Why is the myth of development so hard to challenge? And why is it so important for us to look and listen to these alternatives to mainstream Western culture if we want to pursue positive politics of Nature? In the next chapter we will dive into the roots of unsustainable thoughts and the historical need of domination over Nature and understand why we have so much to learn.

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# 3. Crisis of reason
::

### 3.1 Meeting point!

The difficulties that the Earth community has been facing in the fight for climate change, protection of the species and of all forest communities is deeply connected to the way of thinking that structures all Western culture. As design researcher Joanna Boehnert (2018) adverts _“We have inherited a highly reductive intellectual tradition and anti-ecological worldview in profound denial of our fundamental interdependence with nature.”_ (p. 01). In this part of the work we will understand where these structures come from and how they are articulated in our past and present realities.  

### 3.2 The roots of Western thought

The unilateral and ineffective way of approaching sustainability is in synchrony with the ancient European tradition of thinking that has been spread through processes that we have previously discussed: _“The tradition we are talking about is variously referred to as rationalistic, Cartesian, or objectivist and is often associated with related terms such as mechanistic (worldview), reductionistic (science), positivistic (epistemology), and, more recently, conputationalistic (model).”_  (Escobar, 2019, p. 80).  Researcher Arturo Escobar argues that these paradigms have structured our thoughts for centuries and, having been applied to everyday life, shaped the modality of society we have today.

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme8.1.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme8-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: Scheme 8. In the scheme we see the clear characteristics of Western thought in their affective, political and cognitive correspondences. Extracted from Marimba Ani, 1994.
---
::

This European way of thinking was thoroughly analyzed by African-American anthropologist Marimba Ani (1994), who structures her cultural analysis in the trinity _Asili_ (the essence), _Utamawazo_ (culturally structured thoughts), and _Utamaroho_ (vital force of a culture). As she describes, the thoughts and the vital force of a culture are manifestations of its essence, of its _“ideological core”_ and manifest in the many spheres of life in a society. Through a detailed narrative and visual representations of her arguments, Ani dissects the root and consequences of European reasoning, and attributes the first separation preached by [Plato (reason and emotion)\[37\]]{.footnote .footnote37}  to have resonated throughout history in the many dualities that still persist today.  In scheme 8, extracted from her book [Yurugu: An Afrikan-Centered Critique of European Cultural Thought and Behavior], is made obvious at the core of in the pyramid of European Aesthetic Dominance their aversion of Nature in its natural form: unpredictable, incomprehensive in its totality, a Nature in which the human being is not more than part of, and no human being is above another. 

One of the greatest perversities of this specific Asili (the essence) is its hegemonic nature: there is no space for alternative [epistemologies\[38\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote38}.  As German political scientist Ulrich Brand and professor Markus Wissen (2018) describe, the success of rationalistic philosophy depends on coordinated dominance of different fields such as (re)production, consumption, political life, and cultural subjectivities. It's important to highlight the spiritual dominance (through Christianism over all other spiritual conceptions) that has been a strong justification for conquests in the Western culturally structured thoughts, and that has been an important tool on the exploitation of natural beings, since the separation of Nature from spirituality has allowed their complete [objectification\[39\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote39},  commoditization and commercialization. As argues Italian activist and researcher Silvia Federici in the book _Caliban and the Witch_ (2004), the structures of domination that affected the poor, the women and Nature in Europe, and colonized worlds may have manifested differently, but were part of the same domination process. Again, the strong duality is clearly expressed in catholic tales and art represents on one side of the divide, the male body, angels, heavens, and light; while on the other, sin, the female body, creatures of the forest, hell, and darkness. 

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/tables/table3.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/tables/table3-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: Table 3. The types and drivers of the human (Eurocentric/Western) disconnect from Nature in the past. Extracted from Zylstra et al. (2014).
---
::

Another interesting work that helps us visualize the evolution of the western duality, and how it is still present today, can be found in Table 3, designed by South African researchers Matthew J. Zylstra, Andrew T. Knight, Karen J. Esler, and Lesley L. L. Le Grange (2014). Arguing that the idea of “Nature” is a social-cultural construction, they present a very detailed timeline in which they trace the psychological and physical drivers present in Western culture from the advent of language with Greek phonetics to the informational sensory overload we experience presently due to technological advances (psychological drivers); and from the domestication of plants in Mesopotamia to multinational corporatism (physical drivers).

This profound division and all of its consequences are discussed by many authors (many cited in the pages of this book) that seek to explain the [environmental crisis]{.highlight} systemically and holistically arguing that what we are living through is not only an environmental crisis but an [ontological crisis]{.highlight}, a crisis on our conception of _what is being in this world_. In a deeper and more philosophical tone, this process can also be named a _crisis of reason_, as the Australian and ecofeminist scholar Val Plumwood (2002) defined it. [Again, these scholars affirm, and this author agrees, that the process of healing human negative impact on the rest of Nature to inaugurate a renewed collective and connected mode of existence in this planet, it will be necessary to invest in restructuring, revisioning and reinterpreting what we understand as humans, Nature, and Earth, and reestablish respect for what is outside of the many spheres of the “I”, while overcoming the dualistic vision of the world that so many of us inherited]{.highlight}.

### 3.3 Beyond the Anthropocene

The ages of Earth are marked by geologists based on relevant physical change. It has come the time in which scientists affirm that our anthropogenic influence in the global environment is strong enough to name a new geological era with our name: the Anthropocene (Lewis & Maslin, 2015). The term was popularized by Dutch chemist Paul Crutzen and American scientist Eugene Stoermer in an influential paper published in 2000 and became a recurrent way to refer to the ecologically unbalanced environment resulting from the progress of human economy. Even though it is widely used now, it is still not official, as neither the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) nor the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) have yet agreed on the amount of evidence to proclaim it. 

One of the main unsettling debates on the matter is the supposed starting date of the new age (Subramanian, 2019). English scientists Simon L. Lewis and Mark Maslin (2015) propound two possible historical/geographical marks for the beginning of Anthropocene with their respective socioeconomic origin: 1610, due to the transatlantic expeditions and growing use of coal; and 1964, due to post-war population growth and nuclear bomb detonations. They discard the most common association represented by the Industrial Revolution in the end of the 18th century, as according to their studies, the increased use of coal, a popular argument in its favor, happened gradually. As they state, the choice between the starting date of the Anthropocene is highly important, as it would imply in how we collectively perceive our unbalanced relationship with the rest of Nature and what its social origins are, and, consequently, what the best strategies to confront them are. Therefore, following their cues, the Anthropocene either started with colonization (domination) or with the 20th-century World Wars (violence). Therefore, these (domination and violence) are essential cultural traits to overcome if you want out. 

The thinking applied on defining the new age is also engaging social and political scientists, building an interesting constellation of thoughts on the matter. Sociologist Jason Moore (2017), for example, has suggested the perception of Capitalocene, arguing that the notion of “anthropos” is reductionist and misleading. As he poses, _“are we really living in the Anthropocene – the ‘age of man’ – with its Eurocentric and techno-determinist vistas? Or are we living in the Capitalocene – the ‘age of capital’ – the historical era shaped by the endless accumulation of capital?”_ (p. 3) His views match the concerns of Welsh social scientist Madeleine Fagan (2019), that revolve around the misleading agency of the “age of man”, as well as the linear time perception it carries. Other proposals have been uttered, such as Donna Haraway’s _Chthulucene_ (2016), a name that does not look to the past, but proposes a different future as to how our time shall be remembered. As she writes 

> the Anthropocene or Capitalocene are perhaps really more boundary events than epochs . . . We need a name for the dynamic ongoing symchthonic forces and powers of which people as humus are a part, within which ongoingness is at stake. . . . Maybe, but only maybe, and only with intense commitment and collaborative work and play with other earthlings, flourishing for rich multispecies assemblages that include human people will be possible. I am calling all this the Chthulucene – past, present and to come. (Haraway, 2018, p. 80).

The Chthulucene is not an age in which the agency is focused only on humans, but instead, includes multiple beings as active constructors of reality and where “the biotic and abiotic powers of this earth are the main story”. 

While Haraway’s proposal for a more positive note on the future of this age is interesting, it might, in our opinion, obscure the terrors that inevitably have already happened. An even more clear (and this author's favorite) definition of the age of man's domination of Nature and all its beings is proposed by the French political scientist and independent researcher Françoise Vergès. She coined the name _Racial Capitalocene_, a notion that semiotically includes in one expression the participation of imperialism, gender, class, and race in this era, and that:

> . . . helps us understand that climate change is not about human hubris, but the result of the long history of colonialism and racial capitalism and its Promethean thinking — the idea that “Man” can invent a mechanical, technical solution to any problem. To develop a theory from a renewed history of the racial Capitalocene is to study the matrix constructed by the army/science/engineers/business/state alliance.” (Vergès, 2017)

The racial component in the unsustainable is manifested in many aspects, two that are significant to this discourse are 1) the suppression of Majority Peoples bodies, minds, and spirits; 2) the white construction of sustainability itself. The first aspect revolves around a fact that has already been presented, which is the different intensity that the climate crisis and the destruction of Nature entails in different social groups. The University of Warwick’s professor Leon Sealey-Huggins (2018) affirms that the universalism oftenly applied to the climate crisis discourse (“we’re all in this together”, sentence regularly used to explain that the effects of climate change have no social boundaries) obscures the way it impacts in a greater degree the marginalized people with less access to [resources and wealth\[40\]]{.footnote .footnote40}.  On the second remark, one clear example is the The Green Insiders Club report, organized by North American natural scientist Dorceta E. Taylor in 2015, denouncing the little diversity in the mainstream environmental movement in her country. She gathered data from NGO’s, state-led agencies, and foundations, confirming that even though people of color made up for 36% of the US population at the time, and are the most affected by climate change, only 16% of them were participants in those environmental institutions. This topic also clearly reflects what has been denounced by Txai Surui and Victoria Tauli-Corpuz on the composition of COP26, discussed in chapter 2.5.

[As we are all here on Earth together, we are definitely not in the same position of power regarding our own presents and futures]{.highlight}. This analysis of who perpetrates the violence against Nature and why has been taking place shall aid the reinterpretation of the many pasts and the reconception of many futures. The creation of a new name that, as Haraway proposes, semiologically includes agency and collaboration between all beings of Nature shall represent a new era, but not this one. Now is the time to confront what has been, for the past is, in a circular perspective of time, part of what will be. Efforts are being made to design alternative politics of nature with responsible economic approaches that are systemic, and these shall help us transition out of the Racial Capitalocene.

### 3.4 Inferences on the crisis of reason

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme9.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme9-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: Scheme 9. Shows where we are in the map of this thesis. We have completed the outer ring with valuable insights.
---
::

This subchapter allows us to close the outer circle of the book’s map, where the structural understandings are placed. It was argued in the first and second subchapters that processes that reorient us in a favorable route to a happier and fairer future for all of Nature goes through the awareness that Nature and all its entanglements are essential means for our survival and that they are not endless; restructuring,  revisioning or reinterpreting what we understand as human, Nature, and the Earth; recognizing or recreating local narratives of Nature; and reestablishing respect for what is not inside the spheres of the “I”.

[How might we design politics of Nature that work not with separateness but mutuality?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that fight environmental injustices among humans/non-humans and also humans/humans?]{.highlight}

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# 4. Alternative politics of nature
::

### 4.1 Meeting point!

Now that we have understood what the philosophical roots in our cultures that have been qualifying negatively the human-Nature relationship in a great part of our society are, we are going to look into ideas of “what to do”. 

Scholars, activists, and communities have been imagining and designing alternatives systems to the one we live in. As there are many and the review of all would not fit the scope of this work, some were chosen and analyzed as each brought to light with special emphasis one or more interesting aspects. Five of the six visions (Degrowth, supported by Post-Extractivism; _Buen Vivir_; Ecofeminism, and the Rights of Nature) sprung from the book _Systemic Alternatives_ (2019) organized by Pablo Solon, and were complemented by other concepts I was already familiar with (Wealth Accounting and Ecosocialism). All of them were coined as a response to the discussion above, considering sustainability a multilateral issue, and the last three visions, acknowledging its roots in the [cultural severings]{.highlight} (human/environment, man/woman, emotion/reason, etc).

Despite presenting distinct origins, motivations, tools, and potential applicability, I believe that these visions complement each other, as each focuses on particular aspects but envision a similar future. These are all radical visions that would entail the radical change that shall be welcomed in a reality out of Racial Capitalocene. The alternatives chosen are strong or _superstrong_ approaches to sustainability (Gudynas, 2004), and provide philosophical and ethical inspiration for a project for designing politics of Nature.

To better visualize the practical implications of a new politics of nature that would embrace these philosophies in the “real world”, they were all paired with other (more pragmatic) concepts and case studies that represent the application of their core values. Through this analysis we will distill and evidence the essence of each one of them, as they shall be useful to think of future projects involving design. Once again, the “how might we design politics of Nature…” question will be used to summarize the learning from each topic. 

### 4.2 By a change from within: Wealth Accounting

The World Bank has been making efforts to make the nation's [wealth]{.highlight} accounts more inclusive and more complex, in a way that is forward looking and sustainable. As the institution defines: 

> Wealth is what underpins the income that a country generates. It includes produced capital (buildings, the machinery used in factories, infrastructure like highways and ports, etc.), natural capital (including land, forests, fish, minerals and energy), human capital, and net foreign assets. (Waves, n.d.)

As they state, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Wealth are two complementary indicators that allow a fuller picture of economic well-being and what is called comprehensive wealth includes all produced capital such as factories and roads; natural capital like forests and water, human capital, which accounts people's earnings, and net foreign assets. Accounting for wealth is important as it keeps track of the state of all other forms of a nation's capital (valuable assets), as the GDP does not measure for example the “wear and tear” caused by industrial activities, the loss of natural processes important to all economic activities such as pollination or the future economic losses that will happen with increased health issues derived from pollution. They defend that their efforts started with the publishing of _Where is the Wealth of Nations_ in 2006, followed by a second volume in 2011, culminating in the launching of the _Changing Wealth of Nations_ 2018 report, that provides wealth accounts for 141 countries for the period 1995 to 2014. (CTWN, 2018) This movement from the World Bank has the potential to be powerful as it can change the perception of value in the long term. It still has to be better integrated into current politics though, to hopefully spark progress in mainstreaming the valorization of Nature.

[How might we design politics of Nature aiming at the shift of values from monetary to more comprehensive standards?]{.highlight}

### 4.3 By reduced consumption: Degrowth, Post-Extractivism, and the Doughnut Economy

To transition out of our development and growth paradigm, two complimentary alternatives have been gaining attention. The duo Degrowth and Post-Extractivism provide insights on [decelerating]{.highlight} the production rate in the industrialized countries while impeding that the non-industrialized ones follow a path that has been proven irresponsible in the long term. 

The central ideas of degrowth have their origins in the work by English economist John Stuart Mill, who in 1848 conveyed the notion that the search for constant economic progress was not ideal for the human condition for the social disparities it created, and, therefore, we could search for a stationary condition (Acosta & Brand, 2018). It mainly consists in the conscious decrease of production and consumption in all spheres of a community. This initial critique has developed through the decades into an amplified version of Mill’s proposal and has come to include other aspects of societal life. As Azam (2019) explains, it includes today: the reduced consumption of natural resources in order to allow the regeneration of Nature; the creation of new political and social logics that are not supported by development and growth; diverse social movements that converge strategies for building an alternative and autonomous society; avoiding excess; popular democracy (p. 70). Even if centered in opposing development, degrowth is, as argues the economist, a collection of alternatives that aim at the shift of our conception of what a [healthy economy]{.highlight} is.

In compass with this view of reimagining the stigma of economic success, English economist Kate Raworth (2017) designed the _Doughnut Economics: 7 ways to think like a 21st Century Economist_ as a set of principles for a new and just way of building policies. Her thesis revolves around the fact that the world economy cannot keep growing forever (degrowth) and that we, especially economists such as herself, must create and mature or fresh visions for our system. She presents the _Doughnut_, which is a graph that breaks the paradigms of representation of economic development as it is not orthogonal, but concentric. In the center of the doughnut, there are basic human needs such as education, housing, and gender equality, based on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. As indicated by the arrow, the closer to the center, the lesser the access to resources, making the central part of the scheme (the called _doughnut hole_) an area of scarcity for human life. According to Raworth, the “doughy” part of the doughnut, which ranges from _social foundation_ to the _ecological ceiling_ is where we should be. Further away from the center, surpassing the ecological ceiling we reach components of the environmental crisis, such as biodiversity loss and freshwater withdrawals.

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme10.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme10-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 10. Doughnut economics representations. Source: https://www.kateraworth.com/doughnut."
---
::

What is interesting about Raworth’s work is her profound critique of the way economy has been thought until today, a vision corroborated by Colombian economic analyst Andrés Gallego Reyes, who, in an interview for this research in 2020, described the insignificance of sustainability in the financial field, a situation that seems to be slowly changing. The _Doughnut_ as a framework of priorities and limits for economic growth has been adopted in 2020 by the municipality of Amsterdam to guide future local policies. In a map of the city, regions in which there is downfall of overshoot of natural or human resources are marked and it is possible to start relating the phenomena – how cities are interdependent organisms, both within its communities and from outside resources, and showing that bringing back a region to the “safe and just” zone of the doughnut can implicate in positive change inside and a municipality (Boffey, 2020).

As Acosta and Brand explain in their dedicated book _Post-Extractivism and Degrowth_ (2018), more practical examples of the degrowth strategy can be found in the [Transition Town\[41\]]{.footnote .footnote41} and the [Right to the City\[42\]]{.footnote .footnote42} initiatives that mix [climate justice, energy democracy, and food sovereignty\[43\]]{.footnote .footnote43}. They also highlight the importance of reforms in social welfare in a process of degrowth, as it would, inevitably, decrease buying power from individuals. It would imply “making more of less”, that is, a [shift in values]{.highlight} from quantitative to qualitative. We can perceive the intention of making this shift in the growing _slow_ movements (e.g., slow food, slow science, slow cities, etc.) that, in contrast to the fast-food industry, for example, preach for a more sustainable, de-industrialized, and enjoyable way of living (Azam, 2019). An interesting practical procedure can be fomenting these movements institutionally.

As degrowth often references the industry and consumption rates, this approach might not be completely adequate for the Global South. In regions like South America, in which a vast number of people still don't have regular access to a series of industrialized goods and whose lifestyle has a low [carbon footprint\[44\]]{.footnote .footnote44}, it would become a priority to avoid further depredation of Nature and entering in unsustainable ways of living while also increasing comfort and autonomy.

As Brand and Acosta argue, in these regions what has been growing is a debate that strongly relates to social change and sustainability aimed specifically at overcoming extractivism in the outskirts of the economy. As has been discussed in this work, extractivism is a practice with severe and global negative consequences and has been applied in countries of the Global South for decades now, therefore scholars have elaborated an approach that stands up against its logic named post-Extractivism. Its two main goals are zero poverty and zero extinctions (Escobar, 2019), minimizing the negative effects of Natures exploitation. Nonetheless, it does not predict a complete end to the use of Nature. The authors reference Gudynas (2011, pp. 67-69) for describing the three different modes of extractivism: predatory, sensible and indispensable. These three modes can represent a timeline for abandoning the system we have today (predatory extractivism), passing through a phase of extracting reduced sums based on socio-ecological standards (sensible extractivism), arriving to a system in which the extracting or not are part of an environmentally responsible social/collective discussion (indispensable extractivism).

In both debates, degrowth and post-Extractivism, ecological justice is at the center. While degrowth theories have to deal with the individual conduct of people in a transition out of consumerism and implement deep changes in their material and energy sources, the post-extractivist movement focuses on communitarian engagement towards political participation and autonomy. They are both very interesting strategies that can help us in a first phase of transitioning out of the present condition to a more sustainable one, since they are not proposing a swift and complete abandonment of societies structure as we know (for example uninstalling capitalism or democracy, for example) and could be even more effective if applied simultaneously in different economies (degrowth in industrialized countries and post-Extractivism and the Buen Vivir in extractivist countries) (Brand & Acosta, 2018; Escobar, 2019).

Critics on both approaches can and must be made: degrowth, for example, in its mainstreamed form, misses a strong political and ethical commitment. Scholars such as philosopher Barbara Muraca (2014, as cited in Acosta & Brand, 2018) argue that it could be installed in a society that reduces its carbon footprint but is ruled by undemocratic regimes (e.g., fascism). On post-Extractivism, the prefix “post” has a pessimistic note as it precedes the name of what is not wanted anymore but does not clarify a desirable horizon. An alternative set of politics of nature that fill in these two gaps is presented in the next topic.

[How might we design politics of Nature searching for a deceleration of production without loss of quality of life, based on a shift of values?]{.highlight}

### 4.4 By nurturing life in supporting community: _Buen Vivir_

The proposals for post-Extractivism in South America, Africa, and India are usually complemented by holistic and spiritualized visions such as _Buen Vivir_, _Ubuntu_, and _Swaraj_ (Kothari, Demaria, & Acosta, 2015). As it is not possible to analyze all the three concepts with due depth in the time available for this work, we chose to further explore the first, as it is closer connected herself and to the already described South American issues of extractivism and epistemicide. This first concept has origins in South American indigenous communities from the Andes region and bears the concept of _living well_ in harmony with Nature and all its beings. There is no strict definition of _Buen Vivir_ (translated to English by the Ecuadorian National Secretariat as _Good Living_). Solòn (2019) describes it as a _cosmovision_ based on the understanding of the whole that connects people, nature, space, and time (the _pacha_) and the profound respect for all manifestations of life. The dualities are complementary, not competing as it is in capitalist societies, and the search for balance does not imply we all become the same but coexist in peace and harmony (a practical example provided by the author is  that there may be people richer than others, but these are responsible to securing the well-being of those more vulnerable in the group). Communities should be autonomous and free to express themselves politically and culturally, against the colonization of the bodies and the minds. Humans are not owners or producers, but rather caretakers of natural resources and facilitators of economic processes. 

Such a close connection with the realm of the natural can be easily found in traditional groups in South America who were protagonists of movements such as the _Buen Vivir_ or the many [Brazilian tribes\[45\]]{.footnote .footnote45} who fight for the protection of the forest, for example. Escobar describes who can truly embrace the interconnectedness with all Nature’s beings as a _“ser sentipiensante”_ or someone who can think-feel with the Earth. These people _“orient themselves towards that moment when humans and the planet can finally come to co-exist in mutually enhancing manners”_ (Escobar 2016, as cited in Tassinari & Manzini, 2019).

Because of its adaptable nature based on simple principles, _Buen Vivir_ is not a return to the past and it is not incompatible with our present realities, but it is a radically different societal proposal than the one established today. In the communities from the Andes region, for example, private and common property coexist, and exchanges are not only based on money. Even though it diverges from our current mainstream reality, we have the case of Ecuador and Bolivia who officially included its principles in their political agendas in 2008 and 2009, after years of political pressure applied by communities and activists (Solòn, 2019, p. 34). 

The Ecuadorian constitution is groundbreaking because it includes many articles related to environmental protection (its whole 7<sup>th</sup> chapter is about the Rights of Nature) and [environmental civil rights]{.highlight} (based on principles of _Buen Vivir_). Article 71, for example, states that Nature (or, as they call her, the _Pacha Mama_) _“has the right to integral respect for its existence and for the maintenance and regeneration of its life cycles, structure, functions and evolutionary processes”_, while Article 14 defends _“the right of the population to live in a healthy and ecologically balanced environment that guarantees sustainability and the good way of living (sumak kawsay) is recognized”_. It continues: _“Environmental conservation, the protection of ecosystems, biodiversity and the integrity of the country’s genetic assets, the prevention of environmental damage, and the recovery of degraded natural spaces are declared matters of public interest”_. As we can confirm from these examples, the document presents a radical new consideration of the entanglement between the quality of human life and the wellbeing of Nature, wishing to orient legislation towards [pluriversal]{.highlight} futures.

In the constitutions of both countries, the ideals of _Buen Vivir_ were officially recognized but the practical strategies seemed to have remained the same (extractivist and based on global market transactions), resulting in no effective systemic change. In Ecuador, years after the approval of the new Constitution, the National Development Plan became the Good Living Plan (2013), which proved to reinforce the need for new economic approaches. However, Eduardo Gudynas (2019, p. 261) confirms that the Ecuadorian State led by President Rafael Correa (2007-2017) instrumentalized the concepts _Buen Vivir_ and translated it into _development as we know it for the social good_ and ignored the articles containing the _Good Livings_ principles, as there weren't further legal mechanisms that induced their practice. 

This reinforces that a purely discursive application of _Buen Vivir_, without clear legal guidelines and a following fortification of self-government and participation in political decisions will be frustrating. Here it is important to recognize the many movements in South America who tirelessly (still) fight for socio ecological justice, from indigenous, Afro-American and poor communities who depend directly, physically, and spiritually, on the land. As stated by a representative of the Nasa community in the Colombian Cauca region: _“Looking at it clearly, we are left with but one path: we have been saying it for years, but now it gains strength: au-ton-o-my. It is something very simple: to live as we like and not as is imposed on us. . . . But we cannot live in autonomy without a territory. And there cannot be territory without Mother Earth as long as she is enslaved…”_ (as cited in Escobar, 2019, p. 199). These groups defend the codependency between environmental protection, political autonomy, and epistemological freedom that must occur in redesigning politics of Nature.

However incomplete the experiences of Ecuador and Bolivia were with the inclusion of _Buen Vivir_ principles in their constitutions, they represent a great ethical elevation of ecosystems perception. Another interesting impact they have had is described by Gallego Reyes (2020): the Ecuadorian constitution has been applied by international institutions as a standard for regulating sustainable deals. As he says, financial companies all over the world have been referencing sustainable projects or contracts based on the principles of the Andinian country, as it is considered a well-developed, forward thinking, and at the same time, malleable document. This proves that, in fact, the lack of clear regulation presented by a constitution makes it difficult to assure that its principles do not get applied to projects inconsistent with some of its aims. But at the same time, it shows that there is great need for further development of new principles to orient financial transactions for sustainable projects.

[How might we design politics of Nature that respect and nurture autonomy of communities who don’t conform with the hegemonic Western systems and even learn from them, since they have a healthier relationship with the earth?]{.highlight}

### 4.5 By law enforcement: The Rights of Nature

The protection of Nature has many aspects. Seen by the example of Ecuadorian and Bolivian experiences with _Buen Vivir_, one as important as an ethical and economical revolution is the installment of legal guidelines for defending the environment. Solòn (2019) defends that we can divide the currents who fight for this kind of social-ecological protection in four: 

- the indigenous current, which expands the rights of Nature into the rights of Mother Earth. This amplified version includes humans in what is their holistic view and is imbued with questionings of social order; 
- the scientific current, which based on data argues that Nature is intrinsically valuable and must be strongly defended and re-established in the shortest possible time for the sake of well-being on Earth;
- the ethical current, whose defendants see the protection of other beings as a matter of philosophical, moral or religious nature. We can see as representatives of this current figures such as Saint Francis of Assis and the Dalai Lama; and
- the juridical current, which tries to apply the concepts above to the law, supporting cultural change with [_legal enforcement_]{.highlight}. As they claim, large scale processes of socioeconomic transformation are often preceded by shifts in jurisprudence.

As the Rights of Mother Earth from the indigenous current shares the basis, history, and activism of the already reviewed concept of _Buen Vivir_, the author will focus the following discussion on the remaining three currents, focusing specifically on the juridical one as it brings to this analysis new and important arguments. 

Solòn argues that the first key expressions of the Rights of Nature movement happened in the 1970s, with the _deep ecology_ ideas, environmental approach developed by Norwegian philosopher Arne Naess, who preaches against anthropocentrism and devaluation of other forms of life, as well as defending a new design of economy based on the respect for Nature; preceded by the 2002 _Earth jurisprudence_, a philosophy of law and human governance first discussed by American [“_geologian_”\[46\]]{.footnote .footnote46}  Thomas Berry, who defended that humans must start seeing the law as something that is now exclusive to our species. The ten principles of Berry’s thought are: 

1. Rights originate where existence originates. What determines existence determines rights.
2. Since it has no further context of existence in the phenomenal order, the universe is self-referent in its being and self-normative in its activities. It is also the primary referent in the being and the activities of all derivative modes of being.
3. The universe is composed of subjects to be communed with, not objects to be used. As a subject, each component of the universe is capable of having rights.
4. The natural world on the planet Earth gets its rights from the same source that humans get their rights: from the universe that brought them into being.
5. Every component of the Earth community has three rights: the right to be, the right to habitat, and the right to fulfill its role in the ever-renewing processes of the Earth community.
6. All rights are role-specific or species-specific, and limited. Rivers have river rights. Birds have bird rights. Insects have insect rights. Humans have human rights. Difference in rights is qualitative, not quantitative. The rights of an insect would be of no value to a tree or a fish.
7. Human rights do not cancel out the rights of other modes of being to exist in their natural state. Human property rights are not absolute. Property rights are simply a special relationship between a particular human “owner” and a particular piece of “property”, so that both might fulfill their roles in the great community of existence.
8. Since species exist only in the form of individuals, rights refer to individuals, not simply in a general way to species.
9. These rights as presented here are based on the intrinsic relations that the various components of Earth have to each other. The planet Earth is a single community bound together with interdependent relationships. No living being nourishes itself. Each component of the Earth community is immediately or indirectly dependent on every other member of the community for the nourishment and assistance it needs for its own survival. This mutual nourishment, which includes the predator-prey relationship, is integral with the role that each component of the Earth has within the comprehensive community of existence.
10. In a special manner, humans have not only a need for but also a right of access to the natural world to provide for the physical needs of humans and the wonder needed by human intelligence, the beauty needed by human imagination, and the intimacy needed by human emotions for [personal fulfillment\[47\]]{.footnote .footnote47}.  

By reading carefully the principles, it is possible to notice that according to Berry’s view Nature can be enjoyed by humans within sustainable limits (principle 10), but that there must be a reciprocity between “user” and “used” (principle 7), meaning that there must be a relation of mutual benefits, or at least no depredation. As Solòn explains, Berry did not think enforcing the law was the most desirable way to change our system: a cultural and spiritual shift would be preferred. But it was “the best for the moment”. The Earth jurisprudence started to be applied in North America as of 2006 in the city of Barnstead, United States, followed by a few other towns in the same country (Solòn, 2019).

The discussion on the Rights of Nature as a development of Naess’ and Berry’s work summarizes important principles, but lacks a more complex, practical, and geopolitical approach (in fact, it is not possible to find many successful examples of its application). In order to face the hegemony of development, there must also be proactive ways to organize society politically and economically. As stimulating as it can be, if ever applied, it needs to be complemented with other approaches to tackle the systemic problems we must face in the way out of the crisis. 

[How might we design politics of Nature that use contemporary tools (for example law enforcement) on collectively agreed actions?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature, seeing Nature and natural beings not as “things” or resources but as beings or agents who have the right to exist?]{.highlight}

### By communal power: Ecosocialism and Taking Back the Economy

A current of thought that has been developed in the last few decades and that is radically against capitalist practices and the suppression of Nature is ecosocialism. One of the most prominent names in its construction and diffusion is Brazilian philosopher Michael Löwy, who explains the main objectives of this proposal as the transition out of neoliberal capitalism into a society structured on the respect for ecological limits of the planet and social equality (2010). He and other thinkers of ecosocialism draw inspiration from the fundamental concepts of Marxism and combine them with ecological theories, criticizing the ode to over-productivity and the idea of progress. According to the author, the idea is not to produce necessarily less, but better in terms of distribution of decision power, and response to necessities (Löwy, 2019, p. 174). Therefore, the means of production should be [collective]{.highlight} and the control over the consumption of natural beings (wood, minerals, animals) would be controlled by all the people in [democratic processes]{.highlight}. Another relevant point is the wish to defeat [exchange value\[48\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote48} for [value of use\[49\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote49},  reorganizing the production according to social needs, instead of the market value that leads nowadays (Connor, 1998, as cited in Löwy, 2010).

On a possible transition to an ecosocialist system, the author traces three different strategies (that he names _schools_): 

- the optimists: who believe in technological advancements to provide universal access to goods and services. This school shares similarities with sustainable development, or green economy;
- the pessimists: that believe in limiting consumption also if it means giving up individual freedoms. It can be compared to a _forced degrowth_; and 
- the qualitative shifters: the approach defended by the author that includes production based on strict needs of people. The decision of what to produce and how it should be democratically decided.

I couldn’t find existent examples of the application of what even Löwy (2019) calls “utopia”, though he affirms that some experiences, such as car-free zones in European cities and the [Landless Movement\[50\]]{.footnote .footnote50} in Brazil, are interesting but limited experiences that convey some ecosocialist ideas. This lack of practical example highlights that it classifies as a [vision]{.highlight} that can inspire and guide action but with difficult application in its full form in this moment.

While Löwy and other ecosocialist philosophers provides us deep theoretical analysis of our systems and proposals on possible actions, a work that brings forward study cases and practical tools on achieving a radical democratization of economical politics is _Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for Transforming Our Communities_ (2013) by Australian geographers J. K. Gibson-Graham (pseudonym of Julie Graham and Katherine Gibson), Jenny Cameron and American geographer Stephen Healy. In this book they analyze dominant economic concepts (economy, work, business, market, property, and finance) and show that they can be [reframed]{.highlight} and remodeled by a community. They defend that as individuals perpetuate the idea of the economy as an unstoppable machine and see themselves as insignificant actors, it becomes increasingly difficult to change the course of things. The _consumer_ choice that is proposed by capitalism, according to the authors, leaves us with three choices: consume more, consume less or consume differently. However, it is possible to implement alternatives in communities who are willing to “pull the break”. 

Firstly, reframing the economy pervades through the understanding that this word, which is usually associated with financial capital, means in fact the way a society manages what it produces: 

> . . . each economy reflects decisions around how to care for and share a commons, what to produce for survival, how to encounter others in the process of surviving well together, how much surplus to produce, how to distribute it, and how to invest it for the future. (Gibson-Graham, 2013, p. xvii) 

This notion frees us to think of new and more adequate structures for our communities outside of capitalist logics – privately owned land and equipment, wages paid for set periods of work, _“commodities are produced and sold in markets, and profits are privately accumulated by the business owner or shareholders.”_ (Gibson-Graham, 2013, p. 50) As a matter of fact, as a garden, they say, our economy will build resilience with increased diversity. Therefore, allowing creativity and autonomy for designing and implementing new business models can help create new meanings to what we call the market. They highly recommend collective actions, as reframing can be done individually, but the economy is never a one-being process. 

[How might we design politics of Nature that help reimagine economic paradigms into less individualized and more collective matters?]{.highlight}

### 4.7 By caring for others: Ecofeminism and Connectedness with Nature

More than a plan of action, ecofeminism is a theoretical critique of past and present that wishes to guide our steps forward. The social psychologist Elizabeth Peredo Beltrán (2019) studied the history and pillars of the ecofeminist thought and affirms that it conveys the intersection between the two of the most relevant movements in the 20th century, the feminist and ecologist movements, but providing a more complex examination of our system and more deeply effective response. She says that even though we can spot female contributors throughout the development of sustainability as politics, such as Rachel Carson (from _Silent Spring_) and [Donella Meadows\[51\]]{.footnote .footnote51},  the first postulates on ecofeminism can be attributed to Indian researcher Vandana Shiva and German sociologist Maria Mies between the 1980s and the 1990s. It lays its main arguments on the parallelism between the violence that is inflicted upon Nature and the oppression of women – and people of color or the poor – in Western history, proposing we treat these conditions simultaneously. In its essence lies the understanding that all oppressions are connected and that we must shift the motto of our culture from consumption to care (Beltrán, 2019). 

The care of people has been for long a task delegated to women. Drawing again from _Caliban and the Witch_ (1998), Silvia Federici narrates how the feminine social roles changed with the rise of modernism and after the Witch-hunt period from the 15th century, taking women from the position of active workers and turning them into passive procreators, destroying their social power (p. 334). According to the writer, it was from the violated and tortured bodies of these European “witches'' that the ideal of a submissive and delicate lady that persisted for centuries on was cast. As magical and mysterious as the forces of Nature, the reproductive and healing powers that women had at the time should be tamed and controlled: midwives and healers were substituted by doctors, contraceptive medicine was prohibited and feminine sexuality for women’s pleasure was suppressed. Instead, just as nature, women were to be dominated and enjoyed by men. 

Drawing from the research of Spanish anthropologist Yayo Herrero (2013), Beltrán presents how the principle of women's connection with Nature can divide ecofeminists into three main strands: those who believe the feminine is intrinsically connected to Nature's forces on a deeper level due to birth giving are called _essentialists_ (we have the example of German politicians Petra Kelly and Vandana Shiva); and those who believe that the connection is built socially, named _constructivists_ (such as Indian economist Bina Agarwal and Australian philosopher Val Plumwood). She also adds a third category called “ecofeminists from the South”, a group of scholars and activists that includes in their critique the outcomes of development. Beltrán states that these particularities are complementary and clarify that the ecofeminist movement is open and plural.

Another central feature of ecofeminism is the refusal of dualist logics central to European logics, as we have previously discussed. The division between sacred and evil, men and women, and human and nature is justified and keeps justifying a system of oppression that echoes throughout our societies. For that matter the supporters of this worldview believe that historical events such as police violence, wars or the rise of nuclear power should never take place and that connectedness, relatability, empathy, generosity, and respect between humans, and humans and non-humans, are fundamental as other interpersonal traits in a community and should be cultivated as such (Beltrán, 2019, p. 120). 

Taking these concepts into a deeper level, the philosopher and researcher Maria Puig de la Bellacasa (2017) explores the many meanings and practices of _caring_. Drawing from the works of Joan Tronto and Bernice Fisher (1993), she defines care as _“that we do to maintain, continue and repair ‘our world’ so that we can live in it as well as possible. That world includes our bodies, our selves, and our environment, all of which we seek to interweave in a complex, life-sustaining web”_ (p. 03). She distinguishes caring in three dimensions: labor/work (caretakers), affect/affections (tender concern), ethics/politics (care about an issue), however, most times an attitude of caring entails more than one of them. These activities of care are connected through their function of sustaining life (preferably happy life) on the planet, and they represent a large political field. In the politics of caring, we have single acts of concern (cleaning one’s street, helping someone who needs it) to large-scale politics (health, education, the environment, and possibly all political fields). 

Active and conscious caring involves the [awareness of interdependence]{.highlight}. Interdependence between humans and ourselves or Nature and ourselves. This notion, despite seeming obvious, represents a huge shift in terms of worldview when compared to the individualization and independence that guide postmodern societies, where the most common perception is the one of distance and disconnection.

For understanding the (dis/re) connection between humans and nature specifically, the theory of Connectedness with Nature (CWN) mixes the knowledge of scientists, psychologists, social scientists, and environmentalists who often teach about nature and connect them to propose more effective ways to heal the human– Nature severing. The authors (Zylstra et al., 2014) realize a rich historical analysis, recognizing, as the ecofeminists, that the severing is a central issue causing the environmental and social crisis. To transition out of it they propose the CWN framework:

> Connectedness with nature (CWN) is therefore defined as a stable state of consciousness comprising symbiotic cognitive, affective, and experiential traits that reflect, through consistent attitudes and behaviors, a sustained awareness of the interrelatedness between one’s self and the rest of nature. (Zyltra et al., 2014)

::ImageRegular{.float-left.w-full.my-4}
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme11.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme11-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 11. Conceptual framework of key components comprising connectedness with nature (CWN). It depicts CWN as comprising: information about nature; experience in nature; connectedness with nature; and committed connectedness with nature. Information about nature is primarily based on cognitive concepts, intellect, and information as obtained through education or media to satisfy the mind’s curiosity and increase knowledge. Experience in nature includes outdoor sports and recreation, facilitated eco-adventure and field trips, and is usually sought after to help the body and mind feel better or to support experiential learning. Committed (or ‘‘deep’’) CWN refers to the sustained embodiment of this tripartite as a behavioral set aimed at serving social and ecological communities through transformative leadership."
---
::

As the authors describe, many experiences in nature encouraged today are related to sport activities that can open individuals to a greater connection with non-human natural beings, but are still anthropocentric in a sense that has its main objective in human pleasure or well-being. In Scheme 11, borrowed from the author's work, we can see a framework that includes different aspects and deepness of CWN, that starts from leaning more about it, experiencing it, engaging with it on a deeper level (could be, but not necessarily, spiritually) then committing to action that defends it. 

The author proposes a series of practical actions on the individual and collective level that they believe, according to extensive research, can improve a community's CNW. The list includes a wide range of activities, from one day events such as [nature therapy\[52\]]{.highlight .footnote .footnote52}  or explorations to know one's area, to more systemic/governance related strategies such as including critical historical thinking on the human-nature relationship on school curricula and increasing civic engagement in environmental protection. It can be seen below:

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/tables/table4.svg
subtitle: Table 4. Presents the selective competences and practices for cultivating connectedness with Nature at the individual and collective level. These examples can serve as inspiration for designers and authorities. Extracted from Zylstra et al, 2014.
---
::

CNW as discussed by Zylstra and colleagues is interesting because it links the deep discussion brought to light by the authors that have been discussed here so far to an assortment of practical actions chosen carefully to incite transformation, which are based not only in sociopolitical but also psychological and pedagogical research.

At last, another historical fact that Silvia Federici (2019) defends as fundamental for the suppression of feminine power is the underpayment for reproduction and maintenance of life (house chores, care for the children and the elderly, giving birth etc.). A reaction to this systemic oppression is the Wages for Housework campaign, a grassroots women's movement that started in Italy in the 1970s but whose claims are still necessary. In fact, it was recognized by the World Bank (CTWN, 2018) women _“account for less than 40 percent of human capital wealth because of lower earnings, lower labor force participation, and fewer average hours of work”_. As Federici states, these tasks have been essential for the development of capitalism but have often been overlooked. Marxist theories, for example, consider it as _personal services_, creating a dark spot in the picture behind which women and their hours of heavy work hide. Furthermore, the ability of the worker to show up in good conditions to perform is dependent on this class of labor, that, once unpaid, increases profit margins of capitalists and feeds the system (Federici, 2013). She defends the movement Wages for Housework, which should start a restitution of female social power (represented by financial capital) in the present, as most of housework is still executed by the female sex.

[How might we design politics of Nature that breaks historical patterns of oppression and that foster communal notions of care?]{.highlight}

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# 5. Inferences on alternatives to our economy
::

From the studies that culminated in this chapter, this author concludes that a great ethical and philosophical shift in how human economics is promoted is essential if we want to redesign current politics of Nature. Since one (if not the most) important origin of our historical anthropocentric attitude on building politics of Nature is a singular oppressive vision of the world (hegemony), it is imperative that change comes to allow plurality and harmony. Additionally, theoretical analysis and proposals need to be paired with strong policy guidelines that protect the rights of nature and alternative ways of living, while allowing gradual, collective and participative reshaping of economic activities. 

The theories and tools studied here are some of the alternative scholars, researchers, and activists believe can pull us out, slowly but integrally, from the Racial Capitalocene. Integrally meaning systemically, not without the loss of many beings who will not survive the transition. 

The six approaches presented can be also related to different kinds of human-nature relationship characterized by Raymond et al. (2013) as a way to see that these metaphors can all exist inside a transitional and radical system for sustainable futures and their broadness on the concepts of _sustainable development_ classified by the scale presented by Gudynas (2019).

The understanding of the connection between economy, politics, culture and ecology is essential in any project for alternative futures and this awareness brings us to a few facts that this author considers key to the development of government strategies from now on: 

1. The transition is a long term one. There must be urgent rethinking, revolutionary action, however the shift will [happen gradually\[53\]]{.footnote .footnote53}. 
2. We humans of the western/capitalist society (at least) must change our modes of production, storage, and distribution of resources shifting values from material or industrial abundance to sustainable and fair delight, towards a biocentric horizon.
3. There must be a profound respect for the plurality of epistemologies and ontologies present in a community (in smaller and larger scale), in a way that the power of economic potencies is not hegemonic but enabling of these diverse life-styles. 
4. Diversity is a key component of a resilient economy, we must foster it.
5. To reverse the catastrophe and establish the balance that will benefit all, who has more power shall aid who has less. 
6. The systemic changes must involve how political decisions are made to become more participative. 
7. There must also be a radical increase in the collective management of the various interactions with Nature, as it shall not belong to _owners_, but be considered as part of the commonwealth instead.
8. Nature might have rights until its integrity is not fully respected by our still anthropocentric culture.
9. Incorporate in actions a strong or superstrong sustainable approach as these are the ones that see systemic change.
10. It is clear the need for sustainability to be transversal in politics, from the decisions on the construction of the physical world and of the many services that are provided to the people, to the collective vision that guides them.

These conclusions were drawn from the transdisciplinary study carried out in the first part of this research, and, as they are broad and malleable, can and should be complemented by further research. With them lie the conviction that there is not one way to improve our politics of Nature, but many. Likewise, there is no infallible recipe or illuminated principle to follow, on the contrary, a narrow minded and prejudicial view is what helped Western capitalism and its tools to flourish. 

The last point summarizes the need to amplify the view of sustainability and distribute it all over politics. This notion frees us to imagine and prototype new systems that might help foster alternative ways of perceiving value (wealth accounting), producing, and consuming (degrowth and post-Extractivism), of perceiving Nature and the other cultures (Buen Vivir), of respecting non-human beings (Rights of Nature), of organizing ourselves economically and politically (Ecosocialism) and of truly caring for the other, be them human or not (Ecofeminism). In the next part of the book, we will look into contributions of how design can help on this mission.

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme12.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme12-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 12. Map with alternative politics of Nature and its essential principles and classification based on Gudynas (2019) trends and human-nature relationship by Raymond et al. (2013) (adapted by the author)."
---
::

::ImageFull
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme13.svg
srcDark: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme13-d.svg
imageStyle: "max-height: 450px;"
subtitle: "Scheme 13. Map of the thesis with the previous scheme metabolized and inserted."
---
::




