---
title: 'Part C - Systemic sustainability - Editora Sabiá'
description: 'theoretical contributions for design intersections with Nature and the political.'
layout: 'default'
order: 6
navigation:
  title: 'Part C'
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/9786599492938/css/style-bege.css">

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
# Part C
::

::PageFull{.hide-mobile .hide-single-column}
&nbsp;
::

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 1. Conclusions
::

> Climate change events will probably dramatically alter how human beings view and occupy their world. Sustainment implies a new economic paradigm that enfolds redistributive justice to meet this situation but its initiation requires major directional political and economic change. This change is neither just an option nor utopian but an absolute necessity. Within it, equity, justice and conflict reduction are no less a priority than establishing the care of natural resources and halting the destabilization of the planet's atmosphere. (Fry, 2011, p. 31)

Through this work echo the efforts of many, but many more are those this work is for. It has become clear that it is not possible to proceed in continuity with our ways of living, with the same value systems and reproducing abusive narratives of Nature, since there will be no life in a perished Earth. We are not the masters of the land, we are part of it.   

This work examined and distilled alternative socioeconomic models and design approaches, since both would be essential in the movement towards sustainment. Taking up Tony Fry's vision for remodeling our systems, we have _undressed_ the relation between Nature, economy, and politics in the first part of this work, examining its main touch-points and frameworks of interaction. We then _explored_ a few alternative socioeconomic systems that could be more beneficial to a politics of Nature. In the second part, we started by _unveiling_ design’s participation on the unsustainable and _reclothed_ it with interesting, varied insights that can positively impact the nexus that themes this book.

After this analysis, if we search for positive design approaches that organize _“the decisions that concern if and how humans will collectively interact with Nature”_, it is possible to infer that design practices and theories that are positive to politics of Nature is not only the _good design_ of environmental politics (which are absolutely necessary and we have gathered inputs for that) but also the design of everyday objects or processes in a way that is political and oriented towards an ecocentric and pluriversal reality. It would take, however, an effort to look critically into design frameworks and myths and really discuss _how it's done, what it's done with_ (in terms of materials and processes), _what is its impact in governance and what visions it feeds_.

Some ideas on roles of the designer in the transition to alternative politics of Nature are outlined in the map of this book, which suggest that design can be a connector of symbiotic individuals/groups; supporter of autonomous communities; conscious implementer of materiality and production techniques; contributor to political justice; and nurturer of collective sustainable visions. These roles of the designer can be performed through shaping ways of doing or ways of living; supporting couples processes; enhancing communication; materializing narratives and visions. To this process, this author offers some suggestions, based on the research presented in this book, on what can be the _purpose_ in a larger scale, such as building a culture of care; enabling locally sourcing of materials and thoughts; enticing comprehensive wealth accountings or a new concept of value; or democratizing politics of Nature. All these processes should seek to restructure, revision or reinterpret what we understand as human, Nature, and the Earth; recognize or recreate local narratives of Nature; reestablish respect for what is not inside the spheres of the “I”; and finally, truly understand the life-giving and essential role Nature plays in our society with the awareness that she is not endless.

These are ideas based on the text we are concluding now, but that can be surely further refined and explored. In fact, the map becomes a tool that can be hopefully helpful for supplementary explorations of the theories discussed, since it allows the creation of scenarios. We can see some examples. 


::SchemeDiagrams
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme19.svg
subtitle: "Scenario 1. How might we design politics of nature in which design is a connector of symbiotic relationships by enhancing actor’s communication aiming for a reduced consumption and the end of predatory extraction?"
---
::

::SchemeDiagrams
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme20.svg
subtitle: "Scenario 2. How might we design politics of Nature in which design is a nurturer of collective visions by materializing narratives for self sufficient communities in a culture of care?"
---
::

::SchemeDiagrams
---
src: /9786599492938/schemes/scheme21.svg
subtitle: "Scenario 3. How might we design politics of Nature in which design is an active contributor to political justice by shaping ways of doing aiming at cherishing life creation and maintenance and coining a new concept of value."
---
::

These are some possibilities on high level sustainable projects, as they encompass not only technical sustainability, but ecocentric visions in many levels. They express the entanglement between design, politics, and Nature and provide hints on what are possible fields of action. The scenarios that come out of this exercise should entail collective and systemic-level projects. They are meant to be as open as possible, to be adaptable to realities in which they might be useful. The choice of simplicity is also a communication tool, since these scenarios would potentially involve not only the designer and the directly, but also adjacent stakeholders and the local authorities. 

As the concepts of the map are wide and could be interpreted in many ways by the reader, it is important to highlight some ideas that may be lost in the visual representation: as Escobar (2019) suggests, the transition to sustainment is emergent and plural, but it must be aided by an active government that can promote many efforts correctly. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic that struck two years ago, it became abundantly clear the relevance of committed and effective governance, which can become increasingly participative with the establishment of a design culture (Tunstall, 2007). The authorities, however, should allow the emergence of plural and independent movements, acting as a catalyst more than a driver. 

Even when the project does not entail the human-Nature interaction itself, it should keep non-human agents and natural beings under consideration, as well as the notion that we must shift to an environmentally sustainable culture in whatever context of work. It does not mean in any way sacrificing human safety to the detriment of non-human agents, but it means necessarily finding the correct _truly sustainable_ response for human hardship.

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 2. Collected questions 
::

At last, concluding with more questions than answers, the list of questions gathered throughout the book is as it follows:

[How might we design politics of Nature aiming at the shift of values from monetary to more comprehensive standards?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature searching for a deceleration of production without loss of quality of life, based on a shift of values?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that respect and nurture autonomy of communities who don’t conform with the hegemonic Western systems and even learn from them, since they have a healthier relationship with the earth?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that use contemporary tools (for example law enforcement) on collectively agreed actions?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature, seeing Nature and natural beings not as “things” or resources but as beings or agents who have the right to exist?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that breaks historical patterns of oppression and that foster communal notions of care?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature including non-designers in the process, while not imposing our preconceptions and biases, but offering support in different contexts?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that foster autonomous sustainable communities considering their socio-historical contexts?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature including non-human beings in the design process?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature in which materiality is an ally in the pursuit of symbiotic economic systems?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that are accessible and clear to all, through a long-term, strong, and nurturing connection between design, beings and political power?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature by serving communities in their political claims, consciously decentering the designer?]{.highlight}

[How might we design politics of Nature that involve local (human and non-human) communities in the building of future visions?]{.highlight}

These questions may integrate the collection of insights for designing politics of Nature as they offer not only visions of what it _may be_, but an axis through which we can look into _what is_, at present, in a critical manner. I believe there is not a correct or perfect way to go about this: it should be a sort of ever-evolving task of designers to look critically into our practices, respecting our time, our individualities, our territory, and our human and non-human communities. Hopefully these questions will work as a supporting set for that.

::PageFull{.full-align-center}
## 3. Last words
::

Finally, we have ended this journey. 

We have discussed and gathered a great number of theoretical concepts, critical reviews, and speculative inferences. We have a large list of highly sophisticated reference texts by highly accomplished people. We have been inspired by the unmeasurably valuable work of indigenous communities, activists, and of Nature herself. We have a designed map that summarizes all of it. 

And after all this work, all seven years of work, this author must admit that her visions of empathy towards all beings and re-imagination of a lifestyle based on natural flows were as insightful, potent, and intelligent as this large theoretical collection. We end it by going back to the start. On very basic levels, we go back to caring for the “insignificant”, the “unheard” (human and non-human) to bring to the present deep empathy and sense of responsibility. The seed, after years, develops into the fruit. 

Now, however, we are not innocent. We bring thick layers of “ciccia”, or the Italian word for “fat”, the goodness, the content that graciously keeps you strong and happy. Because that is what matters in the end, this is what Nature teaches us: we are a complex, incredibly entangled system of beings, which, when respecting and supporting life creation and life maintenance, can live a life that is good and happy enough.  
